Hi, and welcome to this module on unsupervised learning.
>> So what is unsupervised learning?
>> In unsupervised learning,
you are trying to discover hidden patterns in data, when we don't have any labels.
>> We'll talk about what hidden patterns are and what labels are shortly, and
we'll talk through a lot of real data examples.
But before that, let's introduce ourselves.
>> I am Stefanie Jegelka.
>> I'm Tamara Broderick.
Both Stefanie and I are professors at MIT with the Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and also with the Center for
Statistics at the Institute for Data Systems in Society.
>> I work on machine learning methods for
all sorts of communatorial data, things like networks, subsets or images, from
theory to making them work on real data >> I work on machine learning methods for
Bayesian and non-parametric Bayesian learning,
that scale to very large data sets.
I often work on methods for unsupervised learning.
Stephanie and I will be your instructors for this module.
>> So, what is unsupervised learning, again?
And, in fact, is supervised learning a thing at all?
>> This is a great observation.
First, let's step back to what learning even means here.
In machine learning in statistics,
we're typically trying to find hidden patterns in data.
>> Ideally, we want these hidden patterns to help us in some way.
For instance, to help us understand some scientific result,
to improve our user experience, or to help us maximize profit in some investment.
>> Supervise learning is when we learn from data but we have labels for
all the data we've seen so far.
Unsupervised learning is when we learn from data but we don't have any labels.
>> Some examples would be really helpful.
>> Absolutely, let's start by thinking about email.
>> I don't know about you, but for me it's really hard to keep my inbox in check.
I get so many e-mails everyday.
>> And a big problem here is spam.
In fact, it would be an even bigger problem if e-mail providers,
like Gmail, weren't so effective at keeping spam out of our inboxes.
But how do they know whether a particular e-mail is spam or not?
>> So that's our first example of a machine learning problem.
Every machine learning problem has a data set.
That is, a collection of data points that help us learn.
Here, our data set will be all the e-mails that are sent to some MIT professor over,
say, a month.
Each data point will be a single e-mail.
Whenever I get an e-mail, I can quickly tell whether it's spam.
So I might hit a button to label any particular e-mail as spam or not spam.
Now we can imagine that each of our datapoints has one of two labels, spam or
not spam.
In the future, I keep getting emails but
of course I won't know in advance which label it should have, spam or not spam.
So the machine learning problem is to predict whether a new label for
a new email is spam or not spam.
That is, we want to predict the label of the next email.
If our machine learning algorithm works,
we can put all the spam in a separate folder, and not have to worry about it.
>> This spam problem, is an example of supervised learning.
And now we can start to see why it's called supervised learning.
You can imagine some teacher, or
supervisor, telling you the label of each data point.
That is, whether each e-mail is spam or not spam.
And, we often want to check how well our machine learning algorithm is doing too.
Then, the supervisor might be able to tell us whether the labels we
predicted were correct.
When I got a new e-mail, and I said it was spam using my algorithm, was I really
correct about that, or did I just throw a really important e-mail into the trash?
>> Okay, so that's supervised learning.
So what is, then, unsupervised learning?
What do I learn here?
>> Let's try another example of a machine learning problem.
Now imagine, I'm looking at my emails, and
I realize, man, I have way too many emails.
It would actually be super helpful if I could read all the emails that
are on the same topic at the same time.
So, I might run a machine learning algorithm that groups together
similar emails.
It turns out I'm rushing around, so
I don't have the time to label emails spam or not spam or anything else.
I don't even have the time to come up with topics.
But, after I've run my machine learning algorithm,
I find that there are natural groups of emails in my inbox.
There are all the e-mails about upcoming and past hiking trips.
There are bunch of e-mails
about the machine learning class I taught last semester.
And there are e-mails about a cool machine learning research project I'm currently
working on.
>> Now this is an example of an unsupervised learning problem.
You didn't have any labels because you didn't have time to give any labels.
And since no one else made labels for each email, there's no supervisor.
In the previous supervised learning example,
the machine learning algorithm had to find hidden patterns in the data
that helped predict whether any e-mail is spam or not spam.
In this unsupervised example, the machine learning algorithm
only has the contexts of the e-mails to find hidden patterns.
There aren't any labels to help it out.
>> Unfortunately, my email client doesn't actually group my emails by topic, yet.
But you actually see this kind of thing all the time on other websites.
For instance, have you looked at Google News recently?
Google could just list all the news articles it finds and order them by,
say, the time they were published.
But that would be overwhelming, and when you go to their site you'd
never be able to find out what the interesting news stories are.
Instead, Google groups together all the articles that are about a similar story.
That way you can see the major trends and
then dive into lots of different articles on a single topic.
>> Yes.
Same thing with Facebook trending stories.
If you're on Facebook, you'll see a list of big stories.
But these are just groupings of a lot of individual articles and posts.
You'll see the individual post if you click on the big story.
>> We're starting to see some of the benefits and
challenges of unsupervised learning.
Sometimes, it's really expensive to get labels.
I can always hire someone to come up with topics for my emails and
to label each email with some topic, but then I'd have to pay that person's salary,
plus it would take them quite some time to label everything.
Humans take a long time to read emails, much longer than a computer does.
That's the whole problem to start with, tt's cheaper for me in terms of both time
and money if a machine learning algorithm can sort my emails automatically.
>> On the other hand, it's often a lot harder to do unsupervised learning.
The labels give us a lot of information.
We can identify words that will tend to occur in spam emails, and
words that tend to occur in emails that aren't spam.
When we don't know what kind of hidden patterns we are looking for,
it can be mush harder to find the pattern that's actually important.
My algorithm may group together all the emails that come in before noon and
make a separate group for all the emails that come in the afternoon.
Well, that's not very helpful to me.
But since I didn't tell the algorithm what I wanted, well,
maybe I shouldn't be surprised.
>> Plus it's easier to tell how well a supervised learning algorithm is
performing.
Just check what percentage of spam and not spam emails it's getting correct.
But is there a really quantitative way to check whether my emails are getting a good
grouping by topic?
Or a way to check whether Google News is finding a good grouping of stories.
>> These are hard problems.
>> In the next video, we'll talk about some more supervised, and
unsupervised learning problems, to make super clear what the difference is, and
to get a sense of what the many different flavors of unsupervised learning.
Then in the remainder of this module, we'll start to dig deep into how
unsupervised learning really works in practice.
>> We'll see how to actually build an unsupervised learning algorithm
to help find these patterns in your data.
We'll talk about methods for evaluating these algorithms, and
we'll see some more real life examples of unsupervised learning in action