This lecture is a case study where we apply the concepts of network theory
developed so far.
This case study is about finding genes that cause autism.
Autism is a complex disorder of brain development.
It is characterized by impaired social interaction, communication and
repetitive behavior.
And if often comes with epilepsy.
Autism is highly heritable.
It is important to determine the causative genes in order to cure the disorder, for
example using gene therapies.
Research related to determining genes that are associated to autism is a very
active area and various causative genes have already been identified.
However, the genetic basis of autism is still poorly understood, and
only a fraction of cases can receive a genetic diagnosis.
Using network analysis methods, additional candidate genes can be determined and
these genes can then be tested in the clinic.
So what is the network on which we will build our analysis?
Well, a lot of research nowadays is concentrated on building more and
more accurate protein-protein interaction networks.
In these networks, the nodes are genes, and
an edge between gene A and gene B means that the protein produced
by gene A interacts with the protein produced by gene B.
Protein-protein interaction networks
are based on many different kinds of experiments.
The problem with these networks is that there are a lot of false negative
as well as false positive edges.
First, researchers often focus on particular proteins
that are known to be important for various diseases.
While other proteins are not studied at all.
This leads to biased networks with many edges connecting the highly studied genes,
but many missing edges among the genes that are yet to be discovered.
Since it is difficult to determine protein interactions in our body,
the data often comes from lab experiments directly on the proteins.
However just noting that proteins can interact in the lab
does not mean that they are indeed interacting in our body.
It is possible that although protein A and
B can interact they never get to meet each other in our body.
This explains the high rate of false positive edges.
Hence a protein-protein interaction network should not
be taken as the ground truth.
Now, a list of genes known to cause autism
is available through the gene autism database, SFARI.
We can highlight these genes in the protein-protein interaction network
available, for example, through a database called BioGRID.
But how do we now suggest other candidate genes that
can then be experimentally validated with respect to their relationship with others?
Before discussing further let's take a small detour and consider a completely
different application where the equivalent problem arises.
So the Sicilian mafia, also known as La Cosa Nostra,
is still quite active in Sicily and in fact, all of Italy.
So let's assume we have access to a network of acquaintances
of individuals in Italy.
Similarly to the protein-protein network, the network of acquaintances is noisy.
Data might have been collected from various sources.
One source could be Facebook, which has many false negative edges,
since individuals who know each other might not be Facebook friends.
On the other hand,
the network of acquaintances could also contain links coming from cell phone data.
However, just because an individual called someone related to the mafia,
the phone call might not be related to any illegal activities.
Now various members of the Casa Nostra are well known.
So we can highlight these members in the network of acquaintances.
In this example, we have ten known members.
But how are we now going to determine other suspects of the Cosa Nostra?
It is reasonable to suspect that the members of the Cosa Nostra
are connected to each other in the network of acquaintances.
Hence, it is reasonable to suspect individuals to be part of the mafia
that would connect the already known members of the mafia in the network.
So we are interested in central nodes in the network that lie on paths
that connect the already known members of the mafia.
Now on earlier lectures, we discussed how to find the shortest paths
between any two nodes in the network.
Such paths are called geodesic paths.
Now in this application we have multiple nodes.
The known members of the Cosa Nostra.
And we would like to find this molar sub graph that connects all these nodes.
This problem is known as the minimum-weight Steiner tree problem.
Although it is known to be np hard to find the minimum-weight Steiner tree.
There are good polynomial time algorithms that find approximate.
Minimum-weight Steiner trees.
Such approximations are based on algorithms for
finding geodesic paths between nodes.
We have a subset of nodes, in our case, the set of ten known mafulsy.
First we compute the geodesic distance between all of these nodes in the subset.
Then we build a minimum spanning tree among these nodes.
This is a tree of minimum weight, where the nodes are the people in this upset and
the edges correspond to their geodesic distances in the original graph.
This approach allows us to find approximate stiner trees
that connect all known mafosian in the network of acquaintances.
We can extract the subnetwork from the original network.
And we call this network the mafia interactome.
Now we can perform a first test to make sure that the mafia interactome
indeed makes sense.
It is to be expected that the mafia is highly connected within the network of
acquaintances.
We can check this by choosing subsets of ten nodes at random
from the network of acquaintances.
And building the interactum of these subsets.
The connectivity of a network is captured, for instance,
by the diameter of the network or
the average geodesic distance between any two nodes in a network.
We can compute these network measures for
all the randomly generated interactums and find that, indeed,
the mafia network is more highly connected than any randomly chosen subnetwork.
This analysis suggests that the mafia interactum indeed contains
some useful information.
Next we analysis the mafia interactum itself.
The goal is to determine important nodes in this network.
In this application, it is reasonable to assume that a node is important
if the central to the flow of information through the network.
Assuming that information flows at a constant speed and
take the shortest route in the network.
Then the amount of information that flows through a node,
is proportional to the number of geodesic paths that go through that node.
As we already discussed in earlier lectures,
this is captured by the betweenness centrality hence the betweenness
centrality is an appropriate centrality measure for this application.
And we've already discussed how to compute it.
Using the betweenness centrality, we reached the following conclusion.
Mainly that these individuals here are suspects for belonging to the Cosa Nostra.
So after this detour through the world of mafulsy let's
return to the problem of identifying new kind of gene for Autism.
In did the problem is analogous to the problem of identifying suspects
for the mafia.
An underlying undirected network is available
together with the list of know autism genes.
From these known autism genes, we can build an autism interactome.
Just like in the mafia interactome, it is to be expected that the autism interactome
is more highly connected than any randomly chosen sub network.
This is the case since the genes causing autism
are expected to be related by particular pathways.
Finally, the goal is to determine new candidate genes
using the autism interactome.
This problem translates into the problem of determining
important genes in a network.
Similarly, as in the mafia interactome, a gene is important because
it is central to the information flow in the autism interactome.
Problems in such genes are expected to cascade and
lead to problems in the expression of many of the genes in their interactome,
including the genes known to cause autism.
To summarize, we discussed how the network analysis tools that we introduced in this
series of lectures can be used to determine candidate genes that cause
autism, starting from a protein-protein interaction network, and
a set of known autism genes.
This problem is analogous to the problem of identifying suspects in the mafia
given a network of acquaintances, and a set of known mafiosi.
While identifying mafia suspects is an important problem for
international crime control.
Identifying autism genes is crucial for
developing therapeutic interventions against autism.