Hi, and welcome to the sub-module on clustering.
So far in this module on unsupervised learning, we've introduced the concept
of an unsupervised learning problem in data analysis.
We learned that unsupervised learning means finding hidden patterns in data when
we aren't given any labels.
We saw in the previous videos that there are a lot of different problems that
we can solve with unsupervised learning.
But there's one special problem that stands out over decades now as being
the most popular version of unsupervised learning.
And this problem is called clustering.
What is clustering?
In clustering, our goal is to group data according to similarity.
Let's examine each of these three key words, group, data, and
similarity in more detail to find out what clustering is really about.
Let's start with data.
Imagine that I'm leading an archaeological dig.
And every time someone on my team unearths an artifact,
I have them record the position of the artifact.
In particular, I can put down some marker near the archeological site.
And we can record how far north and
how far east each artifact was found relative to my marker.
This is the artifact location.
The location for one artifact will be a data point for us.
When I list all of the location of the different artifacts that's my data set.
Maybe I have some colleagues who are historians.
I consult with them before my archaeological dig, and
they tell me that three families lived in the area that we're exploring.
I bet you're already able to identify where the three families live, and
which artifacts belong to which family.
Let's slow down this process to understand what you're implicitly doing.
First, there's a notion of similarity here.
In this archaeology example, we say that two artifacts are similar, or
close, if they are close in physical distance.
In other words, if they are close in distances the crow flies.
For instance, these two artifacts are relatively close.
The distance between them is the length of this line.
And these two artifacts are relatively far.
The distance between them is clearly much larger.
Second, when you think of where the three families live,
you're grouping the data according to this distance.
You're assigning each data point to one, and only one, family group.
So that data points that are physically close, tend to belong to the same group.
That is, you're grouping together similar data points.
When we assign each datapoint to one, and
only one group like this, we call the groups clusters.
Here there are three clusters, one for each family.
Clustering them is the unsupervised learning problem where you take your
data and assign each data point to exactly one group, or cluster.
And, of course, we want these clusters to be meaningful.
We want them to give us some interesting insight into our data set.
In this example, we imagine the clusters correspond to three
different families who used to live in the area.
The data points in any cluster are pottery shards or other items that we believe
a single family discarded when they lived at this spot.
Identifying the items that we think belong to one family will let us perform
further scientific, or anthropological, or historical analysis of the artifacts.
Now remember, in an earlier video we discussed the difference between
supervised and unsupervised learning problems.
There's a supervised learning problem that is somewhat similar to, but
not the same as, clustering.
That problem is called classification.
In classification, like in supervised learning in general, we're given labels.
For instance, consider our archeology example.
If we were running classification on this data, we might not only know that there
are three families, but we might know their names as well.
Maybe the names are Lannister, Stark, and Targaryen.
Classification is what we called our supervised learning problem
when the labels are categorical.
Remember, this means that the labels had no order,
like the family names I just mentioned.
Now, let's go back to our archaeology example.
If we had a classification problem here,
we'd have been given a bunch of data points with labels.
For instance, you might imagine each family actually made a lot of pots
with a sigil, or other identifying mark.
Then our goal would be to find labels for any remaining unlabeled artifacts.
That is, our goal will be to predict labels for
new data points given the labels at all data points.
By contrasting clustering, we don't know the families or their names.
We might know that there are three families.
But we don't know anything at all beyond that number.
And none of our artifacts come with labels.
We have to discover how to group the artifacts from their locations alone.
Labels may be hard to come by for various reasons.
In the archeology example, we just might not be lucky enough for families from
thousands of years ago to have carefully labeled their pottery for our benefit.
On the plus side, clustering let's us find hidden groupings in data
even when we can't run classification.
But just as we saw when we compared supervised and unsupervised learning,
clustering can be a more difficult undertaking than classification,
since we don't have the information contained in the labels.
You might be thinking to yourself at this point, well,
that archaeology problem was easy.
I could find the clusters myself.
Why did I need a computer to do it?
But it's not always so easy.
Here we have two dimensions to each data point, the distance north and
the distance east.
Often, we are dealing with much higher dimensional data.
In this case, we can't just make a picture of our data and look at it.
Also, in the archeology example, we could plot each data point and
look at them all at once.
Well, you'll notice we had a lot less than a hundred data points in this example.
If we had billions of data points, it wouldn't be so
easy to visualize what's going on.
Also, in this case, our data was numerical, each location was a number.
That made it easy to make a picture and
easy to see the distance between two points.
But sometimes, our data isn't numerical.
It might take the form of words, or pictures, or genomes or
something else entirely.
And again, it isn't so
easy to immediately see the hidden patterns in these types of data.
But it will turn out that we can still get a lot of information from clustering.
Finally, you might have hundreds or
thousands of different data sets that need clustering.
In this case, you simply don't have the time to find and
write down all the clusters by yourself.
It would be better to automate the process.
In the remainder of this sub-module,
we'll talk more about why clustering is both an important and a difficult problem.
We'll see many more practical examples of clustering.
We'll learn algorithms that let you find clusterings
hidden in data in an automated way.
We'll talk about why clustering has been so popular for so long.
But we'll also talk about the limitations of clustering, and
why you might be interested in other types of unsupervised learning problems as well.