Welcome back.
In the last video we learned that clustering is a particular form of
unsupervised learning.
Generally in unsupervised learning we might be trying to find any hidden pattern
in a set of data points without labels.
In clustering, we want to find a latent grouping
such that each data point belongs to exactly one group called a cluster.
Last time we saw a particular example of clustering in action.
We thought about how me might use clustering to help us understand
the arrangement of artifacts at an archeological dig.
In this video, we'll go through more examples of clustering and see why and
when you might want to use clustering in practice.
To start, sometimes we have a collection of data but
we're not quite sure what to do with it yet.
We might want to explore the data without a particular end goal in mind.
Perhaps the data will suggest interesting avenues for further analysis.
In this case, we say that we're performing exploratory data analysis.
For instance, I might imagine that I have some data on meetup.com users.
So, roughly each data point corresponds to a person.
In order to apply clustering I have to define a notion of similarity too.
So, I'll say similarity is the number of common interests between two people.
Well I can't actually feed a person or a user into my computer so,
I need to be more precise about what constitutes a data point here.
Perhaps what I've actually collected for each person is a list or vector of
whether that person is interested in each meetup.com group on the meetup website.
Then it's easy to calculate the similarity between two users.
It's the total number of groups those two people are both interested in,
after I apply clustering I might hope to find groups of users with
broadly similar interests.
Maybe after I run clustering it turns out
these users are interested in playing music and watching musical performances.
These users are interested in outdoor sports.
And these users are interested in hackathons.
What are some other times I might use clustering?
Basically, I'm going to use clustering for
problems that kind of look like classification.
But when I don't have any labels that I could use to divide up my population and
the direction I'm interested in.
For one, I might just not know the labels in advance.
Perhaps I have a corpus of documents.
Like I have all the documents on Wikipedia or
all the past articles from WIRED magazine or all the user reviews on Yelp.
I would like to find out what topics or themes are represented in these documents.
In general.
I don't know the possible topics in advance so I might guess at some topics,
but I can't really be sure in advance that I've got them all.
Or topics I think of might not be the ones that would really appear in the corpus.
So, ideally I'd like to discover the topics.
In this case, we can apply cluster.
You might say each data point corresponds to a word and
we can measure the similarity of two words by counting how many documents they both
appear in finally, we can group together similar words to form our cluster.
Okay, but we can't actually calculate how many documents
two words both occur in just by looking at the letters of those words.
So, we need to be more precise about what constitutes a data point.
Here the data point that corresponds to any particular word
could be a list or vector.
Of whether this word occurs in each document, yes or no.
Then we can actually calculate the overall similarity of two words.
A student in my class last semester Julia,
looked at research abstracts from professors like Stephanie and Me here at
MIT in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
She found the following words that tend to co occur.
Words like temperature, graphene, devices and magnetic go together.
Words like algorithm, model and data go together.
And words like quantum, state, channel and energy go together.
It turns out that the first set of words have to do with fabrication or
manufacturing.
The second set of words are related to data science and
the last set of words are related to physics.
But don't worry if you wouldn't have thought of these topics on your own.
Here's the really neat thing.
This student didn't use any advance knowledge about what
MIT professors are working on.
The different topics in the data came out in an automated way.
This is just one of many applications where we might not know
the labels of our clusters in advance.
Sometimes we don't have labels because it's expensive to label data.
For instance, it might take a while for a human to label each data point.
And the labels might be changing too quickly to keep up.
Take the example of Google News we mentioned in a previous video.
We might want to put news documents about similar topics in a cluster.
But the topics in the news are changing everyday.
For instance just hours after a new Game of Thrones episode comes out,
there are great many articles about that episode.
We would like to detect all those articles and group them together.
And we would like to do this even when some surprise wildness about happens that
we didn't anticipate in advance.
In this case our data plan might be a list of which topics occur in a given document
and how similarity measure between two documents might be account
of how many topics are shared by the two documents or
how similar the topic proportions are between the two documents.
Alternatively it might be expensive to label data
simply because there's way too much of it.
For instance there are ton of image sharing services right now.
And as a result there's a wealth of images online.
Consider some recent news articles about the discovery of a new species of bird.
These birds were found to live in parts of India and China and
this picture of the bird appeared in the news articles about it.
We might want to automatically break up the image into the pixels corresponding to
the bird, the pixels corresponding to the hand, and
the pixels corresponding to the wall.
In general, it's time intensive to label a substantial number of pictures and
pixels within them.
So, we might use clustering instead.
In this case, each data point corresponds to a single pixel.
And our measure of similarity might be how similar the pixel is to another pixel,
in both color And location.
Equivalently we might say our measure of this similarity is some notion of distance
and color between pixels plus distance in location of the pixels in the image.
So, what does our data point need to tell us to calculate this similarity.
Our data point for each pixel could consist of the color of the pixel.
Followed by the location of the pixel.
In this video we've seen a lot of different reasons to use clustering.
We've also seen a lot of different types of data where you might apply clustering.
In the next videos, we'll learn about the most popular algorithm for
clustering or probably for any type of unsupervised learning.