In the last few lectures, we discussed undirected, graphical models and
how to learn the underlying network structure in these models.
We discussed friendship networks, and
observed that friendship is usually by directed.
If I call you a friend, then you usually call me a friend as well.
So it makes sense to model social networks as undirected networks.
However, in other applications,
we might care about the direction of the relationship.
In fact, in many applications we are interested in determining cause,
effect relationships.
During this and the next lecture, we will discuss directed graphical models.
We talked about weather last time, so
let's start by discussing a small example related to weather.
Supposed that we measure five variables in the course of a month.
Namely maximum daily temperature, average daily wind speed, amount of daily
solar radiation, average daily cloud cover and average daily ozone values in Boston.
They are directed relationships among these variables, for
example, ozone pollution has created near the Earth's surface
by the action of daylight UV rays on ozone precursors.
In addition, during heatwaves ozone values rise because
plants can't absorb as much ozone.
Finally, high wind speed disperses ozone precursors, and
hence, often leads to lower ozone values.
Assuming wind doesn't transport ozone into town.
So we obtain a directed graph with radiation,
temperature, and wind pointing to ozone.
Should there also be a directed edge pointing from cloud cover to ozone?
Well although ozone values are associated with cloud cover
this association is most likely form through radiation.
So we would not add the directed add ship.
This directed graphical model represents our belief that ozone values
are a function of radiation, wind speed and temperature plus some noise.
And that knowledge about cloud cover does not increase our ability
to predict ozone values.
If we already have access to data on radiation, temperature, and wind speed.
So in this example, we made use of the main knowledge to construct the graph, but
there might also be other edges connecting these variables that we missed.
Since I don't have the necessary domain expertise to be sure the model is a good
one I would not want to predict the ozone levels based on this limited model.
During the next lecture we will discuss methods for learning the underlying
directed graphical model without requiring any domain expertise.
So let's discuss another example where the direction of the edges in the network
is crucial.
There is a lot of talk about gene therapy these days.
In order to develop a gene therapy successfully, one needs to have
a very good understanding of how a gene affects all the other genes.
One can measure the expression of each gene in many individuals,
meaning how much protein each gene produces.
In order to develop successful gene therapies,
one needs to know which genes up or down regulate each other.
This can be represented by a directed network where the nodes are the genes and
a directed edge pointing from gene one to gene two means that gene one up or
down regulates gene two.
For developing gene therapies just knowing
the underlying undirected gene association network is definitely not sufficient.
So in these two examples we have hinted at what a directed graphical model is.
Just ask for undirected graphical models
each node in the network is associated with a random variable.
The directed edges describe dependencies between the random variables.
Or to be more precise, like for undirected graphical models,
missing edges represent conditional independence relations.
So what kind of joint distribution on the random variables does a directed
graphical model encode?
It's actually a very intuitive model, the joint distribution over all the nodes and
the network, factors in such a way that each node only depends on its parents.
Meaning, that the distribution of each random variable is
only a function of the nodes that point into it plus some noise.
So how can we use this information to learn the underlying network?
This definition says that if I could go into the network and
intervene at a particular variable
then this will only have an effect on old variables downstream.
So by performing such interventional experiments,
we could find out which nodes are downstream from another node.
And little by little, learn the underlying directed graph.
Performing such interventional experiments is possible when studying, for example,
gene regulatory networks.
One can knock out a particular gene, meaning one makes this particular gene
inoperative and one can then analyze how the expression of all other genes changes.
If the expression level of a gene B changes when knocking out gene A,
this means that gene B has to be downstream from gene A.
Gene B might not be connected to gene A by a directed edge, but
there must be a path from gene A all the way to gene B.
Possibly through gene C, D, E and F.
And the expression of all these genes on the path
changes as well when we intervene on gene A.
Such gene knock out experiments are routinely performed
in order to determine some of the links in the gene regulatory network.
However, a human has about 20,000 genes and
one can imagine that knocking out one gene after another is pretty laborious.
So for large networks, it is difficult to perform interventional experiments
to determine the complete underlying directed network.
In other applications,
it is not even possible to perform interventional experiments.
Think about the weather application.
If we could keep radiation, temperature, and wind speed fixed and
vary the cloud cover, we could very easily determine
if there is an edge pointing from cloud cover to ozone.
However, tuning variables in such applications is not possible, and
we have to rely on observational data in order to infer the directed edges.
Similarly, in various applications related to human diseases, although theoretically
possible, it is ethically inappropriate to perform interventional experiments.
For example in the documentary Super Size Me,
Morgan Spurlock performed an experiment on himself.
He ate three times per day at McDonald's for a whole month and
analyzed the effect of fast food on his physical and psychological well-being.
Well Morgan Spurlock decided for himself to perform such an experiment.
It would be ethically problematic to perform a similar interventional
experiment and assign a group of people to eat at McDonald's every day.
This shows the need for methods that can learn the underlying directive graphical
model from observational data.
So we've discussed various methods for
learning an undirected graphical model using the undirected Markov property.
Remember that the Markov property describes the conditional independent's
relations induced by the graph.
Now is there a similar notion for directed graphical models?
So for directed graphical models the so
called directed Markov property allows us to read off the conditional independence
relations that hold in the joint distribution directly from the graph.
The directed Markov property basically says that any
node is conditionally independent from its ancestors, given its parents.
So to illustrate this, let's return to the weather application.
The missing edge between cloud cover and ozone means that ozone values and
cloud cover are independent given the parents of ozone, namely radiation,
temperature and wind.
While this is a local statement similarly as for
undirected graphical models there is also an equivalent global statement
which describes when two sets of nodes are independent given a third set of nodes
based on separation statements in the graph.
To summarize, in this lecture we introduced directed graphical models,
discussed examples of applications of directed graphical models and
introduce the directed Markov property.
During the next lecture, we will introduce also the global version of the directed
Markov property, and discuss methods for
learning the underlying directed graph from observational data.