Welcome back.
We'll now have three lectures on graphical models.
This lecture is on undirected networks and the processes on them.
>> We will introduce a natural dynamical process on an undirected network and
observe how this gives rise to joint distribution
over the nodes of the network.
Such a joint distribution is known as an undirected graphical model.
>> In the next lecture,
we'll study the two most important undirected graphical models.
Namely, the Ising model, and the Gaussian graphical model.
Finally, in the third lecture on graphical models,
we'll talk about how to learn the underlying network from process data.
>> We will see later that the same graphical models framework
can be used to make predictions from partial information.
>> Undirected graphical models sound very useful.
How should I start thinking about these models?
>> Let's start with undirected network, for
example, consider a social network such as Facebook.
Remember that the graph is undirected, because friendship is bidirectional.
Let's consider the gaming industry, we all know it's a multi-billion dollar industry.
So it would be great if we were able to predict
how a game spreads in a social network or who is likely to play.
>> So let's consider a game that costs $1 to play each day.
This game is played online, so
it's possible to compete directly with your friends.
It's more fun to play if your friends are playing too.
But at the same time, if relatively few of your friends are using it,
then it may not be worth spending $1 that day.
>> Yes, and some people may really like the game and will play no matter what.
And other people are busy and
may give it a try only if many of their friends are playing.
>> Okay, so each day each person decides to play or not,
and there is some randomness.
Although having friends that play the game is an incentive to play,
it's not a deterministic process.
And we'll imagine that this process continues for a while.
>> Now we'll observe a snapshot of the state of the system
on some particular day.
So who is playing that day, and who is not playing.
This corresponds to a list or a vector with one binary entry per person,
1 or 0, corresponding to play or didn't play that day.
>> Perfect, so we have this vector.
Whether I played or not depends on whether or not my friends played and
some randomness.
If I didn't have any friends at all,
what I do is independent of everything else in the network.
>> But luckily you have many friends.
>> Okay, so what each person does depends on what their friends do and
this process evolves over time.
At the beginning, when a new game is launched people try it out randomly.
The network structure does not play a role yet.
However, if you let the process evolve long enough, then the distribution over
the social network and who is playing, and who isn't playing, reaches a steady state.
>> A graphical model precisely captures the joint behavior, or
joint distribution, of the process once it has reached a steady state.
So to be more specific, imagine you get a binary vector of who played and
who didn't play that day for many different games.
So you have one binary vector for each game.
Then the interaction between individuals in
all of these vectors is governed by the same underlying social network.
>> I see, so each particular vector from different games can be very different.
But the statistical dependence between the people playing or not is the same for
different games.
>> Exactly, the joint distribution inherits its statistical structure from
the underlying network.
Now, suppose I don't have information about a particular user, you, for
instance, and I want to predict whether you will play today.
>> Well, whether or not I play will be based on whether my friends play, so
you could use this information to make a prediction.
>> Yes, and once I know whether each of your friends played or not.
Additional information about other people in the network
does not help me make my prediction.
This is because the effect from someone multiple hops away in the network
must pass through your friends in order to have an effect on you.
>> Put differently, a given node's value is statistically independent from
the rest of the nodes conditional on its neighbors.
>> This is known as the Markov property or, more specifically,
the undirected Markov property.
It turns out that under mild conditions, this implies a more general statement,
namely that any two sets of nodes are conditionally independent,
given the values of a set of nodes that separates them.
>> To be more precise, a set of node C separates A and
B if all paths from A to B pass through C.
>> It's a quite remarkable fact that under mild conditions,
such as the positivity of the distribution, the local statement
that a node is conditionally independent of the rest, given its neighbors,
is equivalent to this global statement in terms of graph separation.
>> So we've discussed how conditional independent statements correspond to
separation statements in the graph.
However, it is important to emphasize, the two nodes can be highly dependent, yet
still not have an edge between them because they interact via other nodes.
Edges in a graphical model capture only direct interaction.
>> I see, so let's be more specific.
You and Justin Bieber are not, maybe yet, friends in real life, so
you are not connected by an edge.
However, whether you and Justin play a particular game could be dependent,
since you might have common friends.
However, since you don't know each other personally,
we can always find a set of people that separate you from Justin.
And conditional on these people, whether you and Justin play a certain game,
becomes independent.
>> To summarize, a graphical model describes the joint distribution
of random variables with the nodes of the graph.
And variables satisfy the Markov property with respect to the graph.
>> One way such distributions arise is through processes on networks.
In our example, the joint distribution of people playing a particular game
is described by a graphical model.
>> Because the interactions occur through the links of the network,
the graph underlying the graphical model that describes the conditional
independence of the joint distribution is the social network itself.
>> In the next lecture we'll see two specific examples of graphical models, and
get some insight into the power and flexibility of these models.