Hi, in the last several lectures,
Caroline has discussed various aspects of network structure.
In this lecture, we're going to introduce a basic class of processes on networks
called epidemic or contagion models.
We can think of these processes as modeling propagation of information:
disease, behavior or opinion.
The spread of Tweets via re-Tweets would fit within the information category
with Tweets propagating through the Twitter graph.
Or you might think about a funny joke told from one friend to another, which
propagates through society by a social interaction on a friendship network.
In a similar way, a virus, such as the flu,
propagates from one person to another.
In this case, the underlying network might connect to people,
if they spent time in close proximity, or in the same room.
Computer viruses are from the mathematical perspective, not all that different
from biological viruses, and spread from computer to computer through the Internet.
While we don't necessarily think of behavior as contagious.
Humans are social creatures and
various behaviors do propagate it through our social network.
Our eating or exercise habits, political views, product or
fashion choices, all propagate through the network of social interactions.
This raises some basic questions.
What sorts of models make sense for such processes?
Can we make predictions about how a process will spread?
What does this depend on?
How many nodes will be infected?
If we observe a process that has just begun,
what is the probability that we get an epidemic that spreads to a global scale?
The answers to these questions depend on characteristics of the process and
on properties of the underlying network.
While the terminology comes from epidemiology, or
the study of disease, an epidemic isn't necessarily a bad thing
if the process is modeling something like music choice or good exercise habits.
An epidemic can also describe the spread of opinions such as whether or
not global warming is a serious issue.
The specific details of a contagion process are often very complicated.
For instance, the biology of your immune response
plays a role in determining whether you will fall ill with the flu.
Modeling the dynamics of a spreading virus by incorporating every possible detail
is hopelessly complicated.
So instead, people study simplified models that capture the main properties.
The models we'll be interested in capture the macroscopic, network-level behavior.
Perhaps the simplest model is what is known as the SI model.
S stands for susceptible, and I stands for infected.
At any point in time each node is susceptible or infected.
In the simplest setting, nodes deterministically infect their neighbors.
A better model is probabilistic, where each infected node infects
each of its susceptible neighbors with some probability P.
We can think of the spread of information through an online social network.
The value of P is high for something really interesting.
Such as a truly hilarious parody of a presidential candidate.
Conversely, the value of P is lower for a boring an uninspiring parody.
One way to think about this model is that each of my friends who gets infected
have an independent opportunity to infect me.
As long as I'm not yet infected.
There is just one shot for the infection to spread across each edge.
Let's suppose that a random node in the network is infected.
You might want to predict whether a given trend will take off.
Or whether a YouTube video will go viral.
Obviously this depends on the value of P
which captures how contagious the trend is.
But it also depends on the network structure.
If everybody has many friends, we'd expect things to spread more widely.
This is especially clear in the context of the flu.
The network describing contact between kids in schools is very dense.
So if one person gets sick, it's not unlikely that everyone gets sick.
For sparse networks where most nodes have relatively low degree,
we can get some intuition by thinking about a value P = 1/3.
This means that each node adjacent to an infected node has probability one-third
of being infected by the infected node.
Let's go back to the first infected node, and
think about the progression of the SI model happening in rounds.
If this initial node has six neighbors,
then on average two of them will be infected.
If each of these have six additional neighbors, then on average,
each will infect two more, for a total of four at the second round.
Since each node infects two nodes on average,
the number of infected nodes grows by a factor of two with each round, and
the four nodes will, on average, infect another eight.
Pretty quickly, a huge number of nodes in the network has been infected.
One thing worth mentioning about the calculation we just did
is that after the first node,
we assumed each node has six additional neighbors beyond the one that infected it.
So if we count this infecting node, we see that the average degree is actually seven.
Suppose the infection probability P is still one-third.
But the average degree is low, with nodes only having three neighbors on average.
Then the expected number of neighbors a node can infect
once it becomes infected is two neighbors times one-third probability each
which is equal to two-thirds.
Each newly infected node on average infects fewer than one new node, so
the process inevitably dies out.
This intuition of comparing average degree to the probability of infection, holds in
a fairly general setting, as long as each of the neighbors infects me independently.
It holds in network models including the configuration model,
which Caroline described.
Roughly we can multiply the average degree in the network and the probability of
infection across an edge to get the branching number of the infection.
If it's greater than one the process has the possibility of spreading
to a macroscopic fraction of the population.
And if it's less than one, the process dies out.
In the SI model, once a node is infected, it remains infected forever.
One natural way to extend the SI model
is to allow the possibility of nodes to recover.
This makes sense if we think about recovering from the flu.
Once you're recovered from the flu,
your body has developed immunity to that strain, and you won't catch it again.
So in the SIR model we have an additional state which we call recovered.
Yet another model is called SIRS.
Here an infected node recovers and has immunity but
only temporarily and then goes back from the recovered state to being susceptible.
This is a reasonable model for the spread of fashions.
Where the same fashion comes back again and again and again.
I like to rock climb, and believe it or
not, in the 80's it was very fashionable to wear hot pink Lycra while climbing.
A decade later, nobody could believe how crazy people looked.
But now I'm starting to see more and more climbers wearing bright colored Lycra, and
I might have to get some Lycra pants myself.
Although, I may chose to go with neon green instead.
In the next lecture, we'll discuss how we can use the network structure for
interventions.
Which nodes we advertise to in order to maximize the spread of the process.
While we obviously don't wanna spread a virus if we're thinking about the spread
of healthy habits, such as regular exercise.
It is definitely useful to understand how to maximize the spread of such behaviors.
And of course, any company would like to know how to maximize the effect
of word of mouth advertising.