So, welcome back.
In this lecture we discuss various structural characteristics of networks.
And how these characteristics can be either similar or
different in networks from different application domains.
So we've already introduced the degree of a node.
However, just knowing the maximal or minimal degree of any node in the network
does not really say much about the whole network.
It is more illuminating to look at the whole degree distribution of
a network instead.
So for each degree, K,
we compute the fraction of nodes in the network that have degree K.
Let's discuss how such a degree distribution would look like for
a social network.
So the distribution will be very skewed.
Most individuals have a moderate number of friends, say 100 or 200.
However, the tail of the distribution is very long.
Celebrities, like Taylor Swift, have many thousands of friends and
lead to very high variance in the distribution.
Other individuals are somewhere in between.
It turns out that such long-tailed degree distributions are found not only in
social networks.
Many different kinds of networks exhibit a similar structure, where most nodes have
a moderate degree, but there are a few nodes with very high degrees.
Such high degree nodes are also called hubs.
They appear, for example, also in the World Wide Web or
in many biological networks, such as gene regulatory networks.
Most genes only regulate a few other genes, but a few genes are hubs and
regulate all kinds of genes around them.
So mathematically speaking, degree distributions are often right-skewed.
They have long tails that extend to the right representing few high-degree nodes.
Such distributions are often better represented on a logarithmic scale.
On the x-axis we plot the logarithm of the degrees, and
on the y-axis we plot the logarithm of the fraction of nodes of a particular degree.
For many networks, something surprising happens.
Namely, this log law plot often turns out to be linear.
This means that the fraction of nodes of degree K,
is proportional to the degree K to some negative power.
In this case, we say that the degree distribution follows a power law.
In fact, many networks have a power law degree distribution.
For example, the World Wide Web, the Internet, citation networks, metabolic
networks, or protein interaction networks all have a power law degree distribution.
Also it turns out that the exponent of this distribution
is usually somewhere between two and three.
So although networks from different application domains might vary a lot in
their size, both the number of nodes and also the number of edges, the degree
distribution is often very similar across different application domains.
Everything we've done so
far has concentrated mainly on the analysis of vertices and their properties.
Let's now turn our attention to the edges in a network.
The maximal number of edges in a simple graph with n nodes and no multiedges or
self-loops, is just the number of pairs that can be formed from the N vertices.
So there's N choose 2 which = N x N-1/2.
The density of a network is the fraction of edges
that are actually present in the network.
Networks in different application domains can have very different behavior in
terms of their density.
Let's first discuss the example of a social network.
So take a small social network, let's say of a school with 1000 students.
And compare this to the social network, such as Facebook, with 1 billion users.
How do you think the densities will compare?
Well, while within the school you might have 20 to 100 friends, on Facebook,
you might have more friends, perhaps several hundred.
However, the number of friends is not going to scale with the number of people
in the network.
You're not suddenly going to have 1 million times more friends
just because there are 1 million times more people in the network.
Such networks with relatively many nodes compared to the number of edges,
are called sparse networks.
So social networks are examples of sparse networks.
And the same holds for the World Wide Web, the Internet, or citation networks.
So what are then examples of dense networks,
where the number of edges scales up with the number of nodes?
Well in fact, most networks that we come across are sparse.
It is difficult to think of dense networks.
One example though are food webs.
Let's think of different sized ecosystems.
So very simplistically speaking, larger animals tend to eat smaller animals and
don't differentiate too much between different species.
So zebra and an antelope are both equally delicious from a lion's point of view.
So if you take into account more animals in the ecosystem,
the number of edges will scale proportionately.
This is an example of a dense network.
Another network property that relates to edges in the network is clustering.
Clustering has to do with transitivity of a relationship.
So for example, since Guy knows Justin and I know Guy, it is not guaranteed,
but more likely than otherwise that I know Justin as well.
So in social networks, we expect to see many triangles.
The Internet and power grids have fewer triangles.
Here, triangles represent redundancy.
So let's think about how to quantify this.
In a network with N nodes,
the number of triangles is maximized by the completely connected graph.
This graph has N choose 3 triangles, so
the density of triangles is just the # of triangles in the network divided
by the total # of possible triangles, namely N choose 3.
But does the density of triangles really quantify clustering?
Let's think of a completely connected subgraph and a bunch of single nodes or
pairs.
I would argue that this graph clusters very well,
although the density of triangles is not that large.
These people out here, they don't know anyone in this large cluster.
So we'd expect that there are no triangles between them.
So rather than using the density of triangles,
we should use the # of triangles divided by the # of connected triples.
This really quantifies transitivity.
It captures the following number,
namely, how many people that Guy knows do I know as well?
So the clustering coefficient is an interesting way to quantify
the large-scale structure of a network, and can be very different for
different networks.
So now let's end this lecture with a third global network measure,
namely the diameter of a network.
So what is the diameter of a network?
Well, it is based again on the assumption that information flow between any two
nodes takes the shortest path.
Diameter of a network is the maximum length of a shortest path between any
two nodes in the network.
So, it's the maximal amount of time that you have to wait for
information to get from any one person to another person.
Or in mathematical terms,
it is the maximal geodesic distance in a given network.
We've all heard of the notion of small-world, or six degrees of separation.
Namely the idea that everyone in the world is connected to everyone else
by at most five acquaintances.
This is equivalent to saying that the diameter of the global network
of acquaintances is at most six.
The origin of the idea of six degrees of separation,
is an experiment performed by Milgram in the 1960s.
In this experiment, participants were asked to get a message to a particular
person, by passing it from acquaintance to acquaintance.
And surprisingly, while some of the messages never made it,
the ones that made it arrived in an average of six steps.
In fact, we see the small-world effect in everyday life.
It explains why news or gossip can spread super fast in a social network.
Think for example about how quickly the news spread
of one of your friends getting married or having had a baby.
So this brings us to the end of this lecture.
We discussed different ways to quantify or measure large-scale network structures.
Namely, we've discussed the degree distribution, the clustering coefficient,
and the diameter of a network.
These three measures give complementary insight
into the large-scale structure of a network.
In the next lecture, we'll discuss different network models.
And also analyze how they behave with respect to these global network measures
discussed in this lecture.