
Welcome to the module on networks.
I am Caroline Uhler from the Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
and the Center for Statistics at IDSS.
My research has centered on graphical models,
causal inference, and applications
of the statistical methods to genomics.
And I also teach courses on these topics at MIT.
I'm Guy Bressler.
I'm with the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science at MIT, and the Center for Statistics
at IDSS.
Caroline and I will be your co-instructors
for the module on networks.
My research is on machine learning and network
algorithms, and I teach courses on these topics at MIT.
The goal of this module is to discuss a variety of network
problems, both from the statistical and algorithmic
perspectives.
There's a lot of talk about networks these days.
So what exactly is a network?
At a high level, a network is a collection of interacting
agents, or elements.
For example, the world wide web is a large network.
You navigate in this network by surfing from one page
to another page.
Pages are connected via links.
These links are what makes the web useful.
The pages in isolation are not as interesting.
Ah.
So networks are found everywhere,
because fundamentally, the most interesting phenomena
are about interactions between basic entities.
I suppose this becomes especially clear when
thinking about social networks.
Many of us use Facebook, a network
where you are connected to your friends
and they are connected to their friends, and so on.
There's not much to do on Facebook
if you don't have any friends.
In fact, not only the things you interact
with in your daily life are networks, even you
yourself are composed of networks.
For example, each of our brains is one large network
of neurons that are connected to each other.
A single neuron its pretty useless, but amazing complexity
emerges from the interactions between neurons.
OK, so I'm convinced that networks are important,
but what sorts of questions can we
hope to answer by studying networks?
We want to understand how network properties give rise
to observed phenomena.
This will allow us to make predictions,
and to better design new networks.
The structure, or shape of a network
can have a big effect on the whole system.
How so?
Thinking, for example, about news
spreading in a social network.
Certain people are very influential,
and effectively propagate information.
Don't you remember the last time your tweet got re-tweeted
by Justin Bieber and it went completely viral?
Well, Justin Bieber always re-tweets my tweets.
In order to quickly spread information in a network,
it is important to understand which
network structures increase or decrease efficiency.
This can then be used to design, or improve networks,
such as power grids, transportation
networks, or to add important links to a website.
Of course, the appropriate notion of efficiency
depends on the setting.
Still, regarding network structure,
there is a whole other set of questions regarding prediction.
For instance, Facebook predicts who's
friends with whom based on its available data,
and it makes suggestions to each user
based on these predictions.
Similarly, Google can use the network
of links between websites to make predictions
for websites that are of interest to you based
on previously visited web sites.
This is, of course, related to the Recommendation Systems
module.
While networks are interesting in and of themselves,
it is the processes that take place on networks
that make them come to life.
Conceptually, it is often useful to separate the network
structure from the process on them.
We can think about the fact that Justin Bieber
has a lot of connections as a network-structured property.
But then we can study the propagation of a tweet
by re-tweets.
Network structure helps determine
the behavior of the processes that occur on it.
The propagation, or cascade of effects,
is what makes a network behavior surprising, and often seemingly
unpredictable.
These processes can exhibit quite intricate behavior,
but modeling the processes occurring on a network
allows us to answer questions about them.
OK, so let's make this concrete.
Imagine we own a concert venue, and we
want to advertise for an upcoming concert.
Like the upcoming Justin Bieber concert?
Exactly.
So instead of just advertising on the radio
or via ads on Google, I want to initiate an advertising
campaign by a social network.
This can potentially be a lot more effective at lower costs,
because it's possible to target the right set of people.
And also, people put emphasis on information obtained
from people they trust.
One way to do this would be to give free tickets
to a few selected people in exchange
for them making a post about the upcoming concert.
Because we can't give away too many tickets,
we have to choose very carefully to whom we give tickets.
Let's imagine that we're only giving away a single ticket.
To whom should we give it?
We should choose the most influential person.
OK, so let's give the free ticket
to the person with the most friends.
Well, you can just count how many friends
a person has to determine how influential they are.
It might be the case that most of these friends
have very few friends themselves,
and news about the concert wouldn't propagate
beyond this single hub.
We want to choose someone who has many friends who
are themselves influential.
So I want to study how to define a useful notion of influence,
and think about how to compute it for a given network.
This all makes sense.
Properties of the network help determine
how the processes on it behave.
But there are a lot of networks out there,
and a lot of possible processes.
In order that we don't have to study
these questions for each network separately,
we want to understand what are the characteristic structures
and important features of various types of networks?
For example, what makes a social network
different from the food web, or a recommendation system?
In this module, we will study different models for networks
and processes on networks.
