
Welcome back.
In order to study networks, it will
be useful to be precise about what we mean.
Mathematically speaking, a network
is an object called a graph.
It consists of nodes, also called vertices.
And there are edges that connect the nodes.
For example, in a social network, each node is a person,
and an edge between two people represents their friendship.
So let's discuss some more examples of networks.
We've already mentioned the World Wide
Web, where each node is a page, and the edges
correspond to hyperlinks.
Similarly, the internet is a network.
Here, computers are to nodes, and the edges
are network protocol interactions.
Power grids consist of generating stations,
substations, and transmission lines connecting them.
Another example of a physical network is the road network.
Traffic flowing through the network is a network process.
Also, most biological processes occur on networks.
For example, a neural network consists of neurons
that are connected by synapses.
Neural activity, specifically the pattern
of electrical signals or spikes, is a network process.
Another example is a gene regulatory network.
Here, the vertices are the genes,
and the edges represent regulatory effects.
In phylogenetic trees, the nodes are species,
and the edges just represents a direct evolutionary path.
In a food web, the nodes again are species,
but now the edges are drawn between predator and prey.
In a recommendation system, relationships
between items where users can be represented by networks.
Finally, another example is the citation network
with each node representing a research article and edges
representing citations.
So after seeing all these examples of networks,
it's useful to try to categorize them.
The World Wide Web, for instance,
is different from the internet in a basic way.
How so?
Well, the World Wide Web is a directed network,
whereas the internet is an undirected network.
Edges in directed networks have a direction.
A website can link to another website
that does not link back.
An edge in the internet represents a communication
channel.
This is typically bi-directional,
so we use an undirected edge in this case.
Food webs are directed networks, given
by the predator-prey relationship, and similarly
for citation networks, gene regulatory networks,
and phylogenetic trees.
We don't see many gazelles eating lions,
so directed sounds accurate.
On the other hand, internet, power grids, neural networks,
road networks, and metabolic networks are mostly undirected.
Although with that said, if there is a one way street,
you'd represent that with a directed edge.
In Facebook, friendship is an undirected relationship,
so you'd use an undirected graph.
Twitter, in contrast, allows you to follow people without them
necessarily following you.
So it is best represented by a directed graph.
Even with undirected networks, there
is a distinction between the type of network representing
internet or power grids and neural networks or road
networks.
How so?
while neural networks can have multiple connections
between any two neurons, power grids
have at most one edge between any two nodes,
and they don't have any self loops.
Such networks are known as simple networks.
Directed networks can also be categorized further
based on whether or not they have cycles.
Networks that don't have any cycles in the underlying graph
are called trees.
Examples are phylogenetic trees.
If a directed network has no directed cycles,
then it is called a directed acyclic graph,
or DAG for short.
Note that one can have a cycle in the graph, just not
a directed cycle.
Yeah, for example, food webs are usually
DAGs since there is an underlying hierarchy.
Smaller animals usually don't eat larger animals.
Also, citation networks are usually
DAGs since a paper typically only cites earlier papers.
The information in a recommendation system
can be represented by a network with a special structure known
as the bipartite graph.
In Netflix, we would have users on one side,
and movies on the other side.
Each user would have an edge to the movies
that they have rated.
The graph is called bipartite if the nodes can be partitioned
into two sets so that there are only edges between the two
sets and not within a set.
So we've now introduced some of the most important classes
of networks and given many examples of networks
we encounter on a daily basis.
We should also mention the different kinds of data that
can be collected on a network.
For example, in the World Wide Web,
we can collect data on which page was
accessed from which other page.
This data tells us about the presence of an edge.
Alternatively, we can collect data just on the nodes,
say, how often was a particular web site visited.
This also contains information about the underlying network.
So let's wrap up by summarizing some
of the questions we might be interested in when
studying a network.
What would you like to know about the social network?
For one, I would like to be able to identify people,
like Justin Bieber, in order to spread my tweets
as efficiently as possible.
Great, so one question we will discuss in this module
is how to identify important nodes or edges in a network
and what makes a node or an edge influential.
More generally, we will talk about properties
or characteristics of networks.
We will learn about the kinds of structures
that can be used to distinguish and identify
different classes of networks.
So another question I'd love to answer
is I had a cold last week, and I want
to know who I should blame for this.
How do we infer how a virus spread on a network?
How can we infer how neighbors in a network
influence each other?
These are also questions that we will discuss in this module.
Also, you might not remember who exactly you met with last week.
But maybe, we can recover the underlying network describing
who interacted with whom just from data
on how the virus spread.
Similarly, we might be able to recover the links between web
sites just from data on how often each website is visited.
Learning the underlying network from data
generated by a process on the network
is another theme in this module.
Finally, we want to be able to make predictions,
either regarding the future or for nodes
that we did not observe using the underlying network
structure and data on a particular process.
Was a certain person infected by the virus?
Or how likely is she to catch it in the future?
How likely is a new link between two web sites going to be used?
We do not know the answer because the link does not yet
exist, but a prediction will help us
to decide if we should add it.
Whether we're interested in the spread of a virus, an idea,
or a tweet, the same basic ideas will
allow us to understand what's going on
and to make predictions about unobserved quantities.
