Tinder, beer, and Guess Who are all fun and games.
But recommendation systems are also very serious business.
They have close conceptual ties to the core of a democratic society,
such as how to run elections or elect governments based on collective opinions.
This is called Social Choice Theory.
How does it work?
We have discussed enough example of what the recommendation system is and
its utility.
Now the question is how do we do it?
How do we go about building it?
Are Tinder, Pandora, and
the Amazon recommendation system built on the same principles?
>> Well. recommendation systems are age-old.
They way they work historically is by we calling up our friends, people we know,
and whose opinions and preferences we trust and ask them for suggestions.
At the core, modern recommendation systems are not much different from this.
They are automated, they operate at scale, and hence require some sophistication.
Very crudely speaking, to find what you might like
we can find other people with similar taste, similar interest, similar opinions,
and then use that preference or dislike, what I might like or I might dislike.
Such algorithms are known as collaborative filtering.
We filter or predict our preferences through collaboration.
We shall spend quite a bit of time in this module discussing various algorithms for
recommendations based on this very basic insight.
This insight, when viewed mathematically, leads to unusual algebraic approaches for
recommendation.
It might be worth cautioning while the insight described seems very simple,
it takes a lot more to actually building a real system, and
we shall discuss all of this as part of this module.
So before we go into details,
lets discuss a few of the nuances involved in building a recommendation system.
>> Transparency of recommendation systems are important.
When systems like Amazon product recommendation chooses to display an item,
it is important for the user to understand what that means.
For example, it is important to tell them that this is the item
that they may want to buy together with another item.
If you're buying an electric snow blower,
make sure that you get a long extension cord as you will need that.
When a recommendation for such an extension cord is made,
it is important that the user understand why this item is recommended.
In this case, that the cord was frequently bought together with the snow blower.
Similarly, When you are recommended a movie, like Goodfellas,
you may want to know that you are suggested it because you watched and liked
The God Father, not because you watched Sponge Bob with your three year old.
>> Simple machine learning doesn’t work well for recommendation.
Remember Pandora, the music streaming company we spoke about earlier?
It works like this.
You create a virtual station on Pandora by suggesting the name of a band, or
a song, or whatever.
And then Pandora keeps streaming music that corresponds to that station's flavor.
Initially when Pandora started, they were trying to build such a system without
really using recommendation system data.
They didn't have any to begin with.
Instead they had specialists, specialists that annotated songs based on musical
characteristics such as electric guitar riffs or minor key tonality and whatnot.
And then in a blink a very good system that thought that
BeeGees was like Beatles.
Not sure if BeeGees fan, or for that matter Beatles fan, would agree with that.
Looking under the hood,
they realized that the reason behind such a mess was very simple.
In early part of their career, the BeeGees were aspiring to become like Beatles,
in fact they were a Beatles knockoff.
>> Now, of course, if we looked at the people who listened to those popular
BeeGees songs, it would be very different from those who listened to The Beatles.
And this suggests that the importance of behavioral
data in building recommendation systems, it's truly social.
To know your preferences, you don't really need to understand why you listen to
The Beatles, but find out who also likes The Beatles, and see what else they like.
>> But behavior data is not easy to get.
Think of Netflix on day one.
>> Or Pandora on day one, for that matter.
>> When you do not have any behavioral data,
it makes it really hard to get going, or you do really poorly in the beginning.
This is known as the cold start problem.
There are many ways to get around this, and
we shall discuss this aspect later in the module.
Now, as we know Pandora has gone on to become a very successful
recommendation system.
So, they really did solve the cold start problem.
>> Self Fulfilling Prophecy.
Major flip side of recommendations is that it may not allow for
discovering new things by chance.
Effectively, a good recommendation system will keep recommending things
that are liked or preferred by most, and create a herding phenomenon.
Newcomers, who are really good, might not get any attention at all,
this is a typical self fulfilling prophecy phenomenon.
We'll discuss how to avoid this in a principal matter in this module.
>> Recommendations are means to an end.
Looking for a suitable person to date or marry,
when you don't know exactly what you are looking for, or a new restaurant to eat,
movies to watch, songs to listen to, or- >> There are businesses opportunities.
Targeted advertising, product purchase suggestions and what not.
>> Recommendations should be objective driven.
Advertising to increase click through rate.
Product recommendations to increase conversions.
Recommendations for profit increase might be very different from the recommendations
that you provide for customer satisfaction.
>> Building a real system is a lot more complicated.
Building a real recommendation system requires
a lot of context specific system design
in addition to all the basic principles that we will learn in this module.
So if you have to build a recommendation system that works for you, this module
will provide you with all the essential knowledge that you need In addition to all
the knowledge that you have from your domain context or application.
When put these two together, you will have a functional, high performing,
recommendation system.