So is that all?
Do recommendation systems help me find things that I might want to consume?
>> No, no, we're just scratching the surface, it's tip of an iceberg.
You see, recommendation system is a very large class of prediction problem.
At the core of it, it's trying to understand an individual's choice or
preference or personalized preferences for that matter.
So wherever it is crucial to understand once choice, things you like,
things you dislike.
Recommendation systems are very useful.
For example, consider online advertisement.
Like today morning, I visited my New York Times website.
So, when I was in New York Times website, I was reading my content, but
hey you know what, on the side of it or
sometimes in the middle of it, they showed me an advertisement.
So, now the question is that,
what advertisement should they show it to me that is already personalized.
And, this is a recommendation problem.
>> Absolutely.
And in this scenario, the question is about determining what you
as a customer is going to be interested in the most in order to target advertising.
This is actually very similar to the problem of determining
what you might like to eat, read or watch, a problem of recommendations.
One way to look at a recommendation system is that it's trying to match
people to products, restaurants, movies or ads.
But more generally, it could match people to people just like in a dating system.
Think of the website eHarmony for example.
Here people are seeking partners to date and eventually marry or
never see again in some instances.
The goal of eHarmony is to match two people who are likely to be attracted
to each other.
We do not know exactly what eHarmony does but
in principle a system like this is trying to do the following.
Consider an eHarmony customer.
Let's call it Devavrat.
Sorry, that was unfortunate.
So Devavrat provides information to the site, mostly about himself, but
also about his preferences.
Using this information, the system tries to figure out his preferences and
find potential matches in the database.
Now, Devavrat may have very high standards.
And among his matches,
the system also has to find those for whom Devavrat is, in turn, a match.
And if we can achieve this perfectly, it's truly remarkable.
Most of the time,
people are like Devavrat, they don't even know what they are looking for.
>> Totally, I did not know what I was looking for til I saw my wife, Salvia.
Look, I got married.
Now Tinder, it's another system like this, another dating system of the modern time.
The way it works, at least in principle, is as follows.
Tinder is an app.
You enroll into it and then you are shown
pictures of other Tinder inhabitants who are in your geographic proximity.
You swipe to left or right depending upon whether you like the person or
you don't like the person.
And the person on the other end, if you like the person, gets notification.
In principle, Tinder would like to show you exactly those people that you like.
So you're always swiping on one side.
But of course, that doesn't happen.
But it's trying to learn this by asking you question.
And the brilliance of this system is, the way they're asking you the question,
they're incentivizing you to answer them correctly.
You see, you want to answer the likes by sort of the ones you like and
the ones you don't like.
Now Philip as a Tinder expert, let me give you advice.
Get a better headshot so that your wife will like you more.
>> How about something like this?
>> Works.
>> Or maybe the intellectual.
All right, so we know that recommendation systems are useful for finding people's
preferences and use them to match them to the choices that they may prefer.
And that's it right?
>> Actually no.
Recommendation systems are like a bottomless pit.
They have far reaching implications in the operation of work.
Take any social systems that you can think of.
Be it infrastructure like transportation, e-commerce, brick and
mortar retail, entertainment, media, and even financial institution.
They are all affected by how people make choices.
What people like, what people dislike.
After all, it's about people's choice that determines demand.
And as we all know from basic macroeconomy,
there are two sides of economy.
One is supply, and another is demand.
So if we can understand demand really well, then we can actually
plan the supply well, and that will make, sort of, operations better.
So as a matter of fact,
consider one of the largest operational problem of our time.
The logistics, or managing supply chain.
A supply chain that takes goods from the hand of manufacturer,
from say somewhere far away in China, and brings it to my, or your doorsteps.
This is the key operational problem that businesses like Amazon,
in United States, Alibaba in China, Flipkart in India are grappling wit.
On one hand, as we have discussed in depth,
the ability to solve the right product recommendations on e-commerce website
helps consumers make the right purchases.
On the other end, those exact interactions can help them inform
what are the things that people like and dislike and
hence manage supply chain slash manufacturing really efficiently.
>> Wow, so it looks like recommendation systems really are everywhere.
Any other aspects that we should discuss?
>> Actually, it might be fun to discuss that Tinder example again.
Remember, we are Tinder veterans, without real Tinder accounts.
Recall the movie Social Network a la Facebook, Zuckerberg.
Remember the game of Hot or Not?
So, in an interactive world,
where individuals are available to engage fully, one way to
think of a recommendation system is like playing a game of 20 questions.
I want to know what you are thinking, and
I want to know that by asking as few questions as possible.
>> Absolutely,
it's like playing the game Guess Who against the Gary Kasperov of Guess Who?
He guesses right in a record number of questions.
>> Bingo, this is exactly how a recommendation can work
in an interactive situation.
Later in this module we will discuss a case study related to selecting beers and
gathering opinion of people using comparison like questions and answers.