Now that we have a bag of comparisons, between players, teams, restaurants,
movies, or what not, we want to come up with rankings between all of them.
This is a tricky question.
This question has been a difficult puzzle for centuries.
The essence of the difficulty was captured in the so-called Condorcet paradox,
which is named after a French philosopher and
political scientist named Marquis de Condorcet.
In late 1700s, around the time of French Revolution,
he was one of the leading thinkers in understanding what is the best way to
elect leaders in a democratic society.
Naturally, in elections, we are trying to elect leaders by ranking, or
ordering them collectively through our votes.
In presidential elections in US, we cast vote for our favorite candidate only.
But suppose instead, we were allowed to cast votes in form of comparisons.
That is, votes would consist of comparisons between pair of candidates,
precisely the setting we have been discussing.
And this is the setting that Condorcet was talking about.
He considered the following hypothetical scenario.
Let's say there are three options, A, B, and C.
We can think of these options as candidates, or restaurants,
or sports teams.
Now suppose we have three votes, vote one, A's preferred over B,
vote two, B's preferred over C, vote three, C's preferred over A.
If we look at only first two votes,
it naturally suggests that A's preferred over B and B's preferred over C.
So that means the ranking should be A be first, B be second, C be third, but
the last vote contradicts this.
Similarly, if we take any two votes and try to order options,
we will now perfect ordering, but the remaining third vote will contradict it.
This is a paradox, because we can not order them in any meaningful way, and
this is what makes ranking really hard.
At this stage, if you are wondering whether modern political science or
the so-called social choice theory has anything to do with
our world of ranking and recommendations, you are right on the money.
There has been a very long intellectual history in social and
political sciences, starting early-1900s.
And lately, statistics computer science, and mathematics have been active in this
topic due to various modern questions, such as the topic of our discussion today.
I would suggest an interested listener to read up a few notable works.
One, A Law of Comparative Judgement by Louis Thurstone,
published in 1927 in Psychology Review.
Two, Social Choice and Individual Values by Kenneth Arrow
published in 1951, and republished in 1963.
Back to our Condorcet paradox, clearly it applies to our setting, and
hence we need to resolve it.
So how to resolve it?
Well, one way to resolve this, is to try to assign scores to each option.
The scores in the setting, like above, will be equal for all options.
That will be successful resolution of the paradox for
the particular three vote scenario.
And when it will make sense, the scores might be different for different options,
leading to a global ranking.
Let's start with one such simple approach.
To recall, we are given a collection of votes or opinions in form of comparisons.
Given this, we want to assign scores to all options, and
here's how we're gonna do it.
The score of an option equal to the number of votes are comparison in which it is
a winner, divided by the number of votes of comparison in which it is present,
as either winner or loser.
Use this score to rank the options.
The option with highest score is top ranked.
For option A, it participates in two votes of which it wins in one,
therefore it's score is 1/2.
Similarly, a score of B and C will be half, and this resolves that paradox.
Nobody gets a higher score than other.