Today we are going to discuss our second recommendation algorithm
of how to obtain ranking using population comparisons.
In the last section,
we discussed our first recommendation algorithm based on population averages.
It was super easy.
In the context of restaurants, we assigned each restaurant a score that is equal
to the average value of all the ratings it has received and
then used that to rank them.
We discussed various adjustments to it, but in a nut shell that was it.
In many scenarios, we do not have access to ratings and
even if we might have ratings, we might not want to use them as is.
This section discusses such widely present scenario.
When preference data is available in form of comparisons.
Consider your favorite sport, say American football.
Well where the ball is kept in your hand during entire period rather than by foot.
Or actual football, or soccer.
Tennis, cricket, chess, or even baseball.
In any of these sports,
the ultimate question that we all as fans are trying to answer is,
how can we rank teams or individual players based on the outcomes of games?
The games are always played between two teams, like the New England Patriots and
New York Giants.
Or two players, like Roger Federer and Andy Murray.
The outcome of the games is usually one of the teams, or
players, wins, and the other loses.
This is precisely a comparison between two teams, or players.
For example, if Federer defeats Murray,
that it is a comparison between Federer and Murray, in favor of Federer.
Or if Patriots defeat the Giants, then it is a comparison between the Patriots and
Giants, in favor of Patriots.
Given all these comparisons or
outcomes of games, we want to stitch them together across teams or
players to eventually obtain a ranking or ordering between all of them.
That is what happens in any sports championship or tournament,
such as US Open tennis tournament.
Clearly this is like the situation where we wanted to rank all restaurants.
But instead here,
we want to rank them based on comparisons rather than ratings as before.
Comparisons are not like ratings.
There is no easy way to take population averages of them.
This requires some careful thinking.
That is exactly what we will do in this section.
Before we go down the part of figuring out how to rank teams or
players based on outcome of games,
it is worth pointing out that this view is very useful even in ranking restaurants.
When we have ratings for restaurants.
Recall the restaurant scenario.
Each restaurant was given ratings by different patrons who visited them and
were kind enough to provide their views.
It is just like re-watching movies and then rating the movies.
Now the problem with rating is that it is phenomenally subjective.
You and I might like food in restaurant equally but
I might be stingy in giving ratings and you might be very liberal.
What that means is that rating of four that you give,
is different from the rating of four I give.
Or depending on the mood of the day, I might be more or
less liberal in giving my rating.
In a sense, there is nothing absolute about ratings.
To explain this important nuance, I would like to play a small game with you.
Suppose I give you a blue color square and
ask you, tell me the hexadecimal code of this.
You'll wonder what is that?
This is like me asking you to rate the restaurant or my orthopedic surgeon
asking me during my visit, on a scale of 1 to 10, please rate your pain.
How do I know what nine means?
Or for that matter, I'm not even sure what is the difference between eight and nine.
And I wonder every time I'm asked this question,
should I tell him a high number so I can get his attention?
Well, a better situation is going to an optometrist who asked you,
compare this scenario versus that scenario.
Which one provides you better vision?
And through a sequence of such comparisons,
we find the perfect eye power leading to somebody like me,
able to see clearly and without any headache talking to you.
This is like asking question.
Which one of two different blue squares is more blue?
It's very easy to answer for you and me.
And it is definitely not more absolute than asking for ratings.
Back to setting up restaurants.
If we are asked to compare two restaurants, when asked preference for
West Bridge or Catalyst, it means the same to me and the same to you.
And therefore, we can use comparison data between restaurants to rank them as well.
But this is the place where you say wait,
Yelp has collected ratings on restaurants rather than comparisons.
Now what to do?
No worries.
Ratings provide comparisons.
Suppose I have rated West Bridge four-star and Catalyst three-star.
Then I have implicitly compared West Bridge and Catalyst,
in favor of West Bridge.
Okay so we are all comfortable with the fact that even in the restaurant setting,
we have comparisons even though it was not obvious to start with.