In the past few sections, we have already seen many interesting and
very useful methods to find grouping structure in data.
For example, the k-means algorithm.
In the next few sections,
we’ll see other very interesting tools that tell us a whole lot about our data.
In particular, some of these work even if you can't apply k-means.
So, let's quickly recap a few things.
For clustering and many other tasks, our data comes in form of data points.
Each data point is a feature vector.
You can think of it as a string of numbers and each number describes a feature.
For example, in the introductory email example, each email is a data point.
It is described by the words it contains.
So, we have a huge vector and each entry in this vector corresponds to a word.
The number for each word means how often this word occurs in the email.
With such representations, we can use k-means, but
then we are not always so lucky.
Let's think about some examples.
The feature vectors can contain too much useless information or noise.
We may not have such vectors at all.
In such cases, we may be able to construct new features from whatever we had.
Sounds weird?
Well, soon, we will see how to do that.
First, let's look at some examples.
Data can contain a lot of measurements.
That is each data point is a huge feature vector with many entries.
Think of a person being a data point and the descriptions,
the variation in the person's genome.
That can be a lot or think of a collection of images that are face portraits.
Each image is a data point and is described by a few hundred thousand
pixels, but then some pixels will be more meaningful than others.
If you look at the upper right corner of face board read images that is most
likely going to be not so relevant, it is constant or
varies randomly across images since it's background.
So, there's not a whole lot of information.
The important information is how the images deviate in the major way from some
average image.
For example, there will be variations in here.
Glasses, beard and so on.
These major access of variations are what captures that data in a more meaningful
way and maybe there are actually matched your axis and pixels.
Why?
Some groups of pixels tend to vary together,
because they belong to some subregions like eye brows and chin.
These few trends can help compress the data.
Similarly, user ratings can be much more easily understood with patterns.
My ratings for movie can be understood more easily,
if you know that I like comedies or action movies.
Finding and recognizing such patterns can help reduce the complexity in the data
to reduce noise, and bring out important trends, and also to compress it.
We will see some important methods for finding such patterns and
then sometimes we do not even have feature vectors.
Think back about the social network of monks that Sampson recorded back in
the 60s.
The monks are our data points and we want to find groups of friends among them.
Similarly, of course, for much larger networks like Facebook.
Can we use k-means to find groups here?
It's going to be hard.
We don't have any feature vectors.
All we know is who talks to whom.
So, we have placed the monks and we have relationships who talks to whom.
This gives us a graph.
We can draw all the monks on paper and draw lines between those who talk.
The structure of points and lines is a graph.
The lines are called edges.
This graph tells us a whole lot about the patterns in our data.
Groups of friends will have lots of edges between them and
between such groups, there are not many edges.
We will see how a little bit of math will magically find us the groups in the graph.
In fact, for all of the problems I mentioned on a high-level,
the same approach will work.
We are going to create new features that represent our data point.
These new features reveal a lot about the hidden structure in the data.
Each data point can be represented by those new features.
Where do they come from?
We construct them by looking at the entire data.
Sounds like magic?
We will soon see how the magic works.