Hi, I'm Victor Chernozhukov, professor in the Department of Economics and Center for
Statistics at MIT.
My research in teaching for this econometrics and
mathematical statistics was much of recent efforts
due added to the use of machine learning methods for causal Inference.
In this module, we will discuss regression in classical and modern versions.
Regression analysis is about discovering correlations between the outcome,
y and the set of regressors x, which sometimes are also called features.
In this module, y is always the real random variable and
x is the vector of random variables, with components denoted by X1 through Xp.
Where we always assume that a concept of one is included as one of the components.
We denote the transpose of a vector by the prime sign.
For example, suppose our y is hourly wage which varies across workers, and
x is the retro regressors which include variables that measure education,
experience gender, and other job relevant characteristics.
When we are interested in the effect of a particular component of x and
y, we show partition axis for D and W, where D will be the target regressor and
W will be called the controls of components.
The purpose of the regression analysis is to characterize the statistical
relation y to x.
Namely, we want to answer two question.
Question one, or the prediction question.
How can we use x to predict y well?
Question two, or the inference question.
How does the predicted value of y change if we change a component of x,
holding the rest of the components of x fixed?
In our wage example,
the predictions questions becomes how to use job relevant characteristics,
such as education, experience, gender and others, to best predict the wage?
An inference question becomes for example, how gender affects the predicted wage?
This allows us to uncover gender discrimination if it exists.
In this module, we will discuss classical and
modern regression tools that answer these two questions.
We'll now give a preview of some of the empirical findings from a case
study in which we will examine our wage example
using data from the US current population survey in 2012 for single workers.
We will address the two questions post.
Number one, we will construct a prediction rule for
a hourly wage which depends on the job relevant characteristics linearly.
We will assess the quality of the prediction rule
using our sample prediction performance.
Number two, we will find that an average women get about $2 less an hourly wage
than men with the same experience and other recorded characteristics.
This is called the gender wage gap in labor economics and
measures in part gender paid discrimination