Now, we turn our attention to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster that occurred
in January 28, 1986.
Through this case study, we would like to highlight how the application of the tools
you have already learned, specifically logistic regression, could have allowed
the management of NASA to potentially arrive at the different conclusion
when deciding whether to postpone the launch of the shuttle on that fateful day.
We should note that some of the details, data, and circumstances are different from
those that actually took place and were simplified for the discussion purposes.
The high level ideas are the same, though.
Some background.
Up until January 28, 1986,
the Challenger had been launched 24 times with no catastrophes.
A catastrophe can occur, in particular, if the collective failure of
all these so-called O-rings that we have discussed at the beginning occurs.
However, 7 of these 24 launches had experienced at least one O-ring failure.
During one of such launches, in fact, three of five rings failed.
One launch had two O-rings failed, and five launches had a single failure.
So collectively, there were ten O-ring failures.
On the day of the 28th launch, which had already been postponed a few times
due to bad weather and other technical difficulties, the temperature
at the launch site, Kennedy Space Center, Florida, was unusually cold with morning
temperature close to 30 degrees Fahrenheit minus one degree Celsius.
Some engineers expressed concerns about the launch in such cold weather given
that there was no data to certify this successful launch at those temperatures.
It was eventually decided to go ahead with the launch.
Tragically, Challenger experienced a catastrophe were all of the five O-Rings
failed leading to the destruction of the shuttle and killing everybody on board.
The launch and the subsequent disaster was broadcasted live
on television to a large audience across the United States, making headline news.
President Reagan made a special announcement in place of the original
scheduled State of the Union Address.
When reviewing data from the previous 24 launches,
the team at NASA, which notably did not include a statistician,
decided to look at the temperature at the time of launch for all O-ring failures.
Effectively, they looked at the plot shown here.
This figure is the scatter plot for the temperatures at launch and
the number of O-rings that failed.
There were two launches with one failure, which occurred at
temperature 70 degrees Fahrenheit, which is indicated by a bigger blue circle.
Notably, this is data only for
the seven launches when the failures of O-rings did occur.
This plot appears to hint that there is no significant relationship
between the temperatures and O-ring failures given that the failures
have not exclusively occurred at lower temperatures.
However, as we said, this analysis ignores valuable information available from
the 18 other launches where no failures occurred.
A complete plot looks like this.
The marks in red show launches where no O-ring failures were detected
while those in blue represent one or more O-rings failures as before.
The picture now appears quite different, doesn't it?
It is clear that higher temperature tend to result in safer launches while
there is a skew towards lower temperatures of O-ring failures.
Alas, the absence of this more complete analysis could have provided
deeper insight to inform NASA's decision
as to weather to go ahead with the launch on the morning of January 28th.
In fact, in the aftermath of the disaster,
one of the recommendations of the investigation commission
was to have a statistician be a part of the control team.
Savvy students such as yourself would not accept a scatter plot as confirmation of
the relationship between the O-ring failures and temperatures.
Indeed, while the scatter plot visually depicts a relationship,
we now have a tool to be more rigorous than that.
Since this problem involves a binary classification, that is failure,
no failure, and
we have an independent variable, that is temperature at time of the launch.
It appears that logistic regression might come in handy to establish a relationship
between independent and dependent variables and
crucially help predict the probability of failure given the core temperature
of the morning of January 28, 1986.
Now, let's see how we might build such a model.
First, let us look at the following table, which gives the number of failed O-rings
for each of the 24 launches along with temperature during the launch.
First, note that for each of the 24 past launches,
we have 5 independent data points since the shuttle has 5 O-rings.
For example, two launches took place at 70 degrees Fahrenheit with no O-ring failures
during either of the launches.
So we have collectively 10 data points, 5 for each launch
corresponding to this temperature, which is classified as no failures.
All in all, we have 24 * 5, that is 120 data points from past launches.
For our dependent variable Y, we have the binary states.
No failure or failure, which can be represented as zero or
one, where zero corresponds to no failure and one corresponds to failure.
So out of these 120 data points, we have ten failures,
value 1 in column Y and 110 no failures, value zero in column Y.
For the independent variable X, this problem only has the temperature
at the time of the launch in degrees Fahrenheit.
Our data is shown here.
We are interested in the likelihood of O-ring failure.
That is Y equal to one, given the lowest temperature on January 28, 1986.
The temperature on that morning was 36 degrees Fahrenheit.
Specifically, we are interested in the following likelihood.
The probability that Y equals 1 conditional
on the temperature X equals 36.
According to our logistic regression model, this is expressed as follows.
The probability that Y equals 1 given that X equals 36 is as follows.
In order to determine this probability,
we need to use logistic regression to determine the coefficients beta zero and
beta using the 120 data points from past launches.
Using logistic regression library in your favorite environment,
R, Python, etc., using the 120 data points,
we'll get the following maximum likelihood values for the coefficients.
The coefficients we are most interested in is beta, because it helps us determine
the relationship between the temperature at launch and the failure of O-rings.
At the 95% significance level, the confidence interval for
beta is from -0.5 to -0.2, which does not include zero,
implying that the coefficient for beta is significant.
Alternatively, the P-value for this coefficient is 0.002,
which is less than 0.05 and confers the same information about the significance of
temperature in determining the no failure versus failure of O-rings.
This is already something.
We have determined with 95% confidence that temperature does impact
the likelihood of O-ring failure.
The negative sign for the coefficient beta tells us that the temperature
in O-ring failures are inversely related as we have intuitively determined earlier.
Specifically, all things being equal, the odds of failure decrease by roughly 14%
when the temperature increases by one degree Fahrenheit.
We can find this from the following derivation.
Similarly, the odds of failure increase by roughly 16%
when the temperature decreases by one degree Fahrenheit.
Note that these are the proportional changes of odds and
not the actual probabilities.
We now turn our attention to answering the questions we set out for ourselves.
What is the probability of failure for
each of the 5 rings on the morning of January 28,
1986 given that the temperature at launch was 36 degrees Fahrenheit?
We'll use our logistical regression model to answer this question.
First, the probability that one can create O-ring fails,
let's say the O-ring labeled OA is found to be as follows.
The probability that Y is equal 1 conditional that x is equal to 36 is as
follows.
There is almost 90%.
This is quite significant probability of failure.
But does that also answer our question about the probability of catastrophe?
Recall that there are five O-rings, and
we'll have to determine the probability of failure for each of them
individually in order for us to determine the probability of a catastrophe.
We need to determine the probability of failure for all five such O-rings.
The failures of O-rings at a given temperature are independent events,
thus the probability of a catastrophe is the probability of one of the O-ring
failures multiplied by itself five times.
Namely, it is 0.89 raised to the power 5, like this.
According to our logistic regression model,
the probability of a catastrophe on that fateful morning was as high as 57%.
Had such an analysis has been performed before approving the launch, it is quite
unlikely the decision to launch would have been taken by the management of NASA.
For reference, the table below shows the probability of failures for
individual O-rings in the corresponding probability of a catastrophe
at various temperatures according to our model.
Caution.
While it may seem like logistical regression alone could have prevented
the Challenger disaster from happening, we must use caution in our conclusions.
There are several reasons why the logistic regression model presented here
must be accepted with some caution.
The model we used is very simple.
It only incorporates a single independent variable,
temperature, at the time of launch.
For a system as complex as the Space Shuttle Challenger,
it is hard to believe that the management and the engineering teams would be happier
relying on such a single variable logistic regression model
to predict the probability of failure of a very complex engineering system.
To get the reliable likelihood of failure, one would need to take into account as
much complexity of the real system as possible.
But this arguably simple model would still raise enough flags to stop the launch and
perhaps to do a far more rigorous analysis.
Notice that while we insisted on using all of the data available to the teams at
NASA, there was not a single data point that included a launch
temperature close to the 36 degree Fahrenheit observed on January 28, 1986.
As such, the model is extrapolating the relationship based on available data to
a region, which is significantly outside of the available data.
We can counter this by suggesting to use
a 55 degree temperature as a benchmark as opposed to 36 degree temperature.
After all, launches did take place at temperatures lower than 55 degrees.
The likelihood of a single O-ring failure, according to our table,
is 0.34 at this temperature and the likelihood of a catastrophe
is 0.34 raised to the power five, which is about half a percent.
Would you proceed with the launch with such odds of failure,
especially given that the actual temperature was much colder?
In summary, while our estimate of 57% likelihood of a catastrophe can be rightly
criticized, there was certainly enough evidence that the likelihood of
the disaster was significantly high and the launch should have been postponed.