It's a beautiful sunny day and you just arrived at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam.
A sparkling European airport suggests the start of a great three day vacation.
Tired from a long overseas flight you walk into a cafe and
order a fresh cup of coffee with a apple Danish but your Visa card is declined.
The credit card company suspects a fraudulent transaction.
And in order to prevent the fraud it stops it.
You walk to the nearest ATM to get some local currency.
Perhaps, only to discover that your cash withdrawal is declined as well.
>> A few months later, during a business trip to Toronto,
you receive a phone call from your credit card company.
The operator wishes to inquire about the legitimacy of a transaction on your credit
card that was attempted the previous evening,
in which someone tried to use the card to purchase some liquor in New Jersey.
Yesterday evening you were en route to Toronto, and
you certainly did not intend to buy any liquor.
Your card was in your possession at all times, but the operator informs you that
these days it's not hard for criminals to copy the information on a magnetic strip
to a different card, which was probably what occurred.
Luckily, the bank figured out that the purchase was almost certainly fraudulent,
and it stopped the transaction.
>> The two examples above are really two faces of the same coin.
Your credit card company constantly needs to check the legitimacy of
the transaction credit cards.
The verification needs to be done rapidly in a matter of a split second.
It needs to approve the transactions the company deems to legitimate, and
decline the ones it suspects to be fraud.
>> In the first example, a legitimate transaction was declined by your bank,
creating a major inconvenience on your end.
>> But in the second example, an illegitimate transaction was thankfully
declined by the bank, saving you from the frustration of dealing with a fraud and
possibility of even a financial loss.
>> Credit card companies constantly deal with assessing the likelihood
that a given transaction is illegitimate.
Need to minimize the risk of either declining legitimate transaction or
allowing a fraudulent one.
In this module, we'll introduce statistical methods that assist companies
in assessing these types of risks.
It'll be our first example of a very common category of questions which we'll
refer to as binary classification.