The example above, for
the credit card transaction and fraud detection, is one of the many,
many examples where a classification problem needs to be solved based on
the availability of imperfect information usually in the form of some data.
Another very similar example of fraud detection is medical fraud.
A medical provider sends an invoice to a health insurance company for
some services provided to a patient.
Sometimes unfortunately, the services are fake and
possibly even the patient was nonexistent.
The insurance company needs to come up with a quick judgement
on the validity of the claim, honoring the claims it deems valid and
declining the claims that look suspicious.
A set up very similar to the one with the credit card example.
A slight difference is the timing of the decision and the actual process.
If the claim is dimmed to be fraud, it is sometimes turned to a human expert
who can make a further determination regarding the validity of the claim, and
only upon further investigation make a final determination.
Whereas in the credit card example, the determination is conducted immediately.
As before the problem is classifying the claim as legitimate versus fraud.
>> Let's consider a different example from the healthcare area.
A patient is rushed to a hospital emergency center with severe symptoms
including chest pain, shortness of breath, heart palpitations, sweat and
some other symptoms usually associated with a heart attack.
The doctors needs to make a quick determination of whether this is indeed
a case of a heart attack and take the appropriate measures.
Again this is the example of classification.
Heart attack versus not heart attack.
The determination needs to be made rapidly in potently life threatening situation.
All of the examples above fall into the category of so
called binary classification, where the goal is to place the given object into one
of two possible classification groups.
Other examples of binary classification are determining the gender, male or female
of a photograph, spam versus not spam for emails, impact versus no impact for
a potential drug, healthy versus cancerous for tissue in a tumor, global warming
versus normal temperature fluctuations and geoscience among many others.
>> The history of humans facing various kinds of classification problem
is very old.
Think about the questions enemy versus friend, murderer versus not a murderer.
Think about any civil or criminal trial.
The goal of the jury is to solve a binary classification problem.
Guilty versus not guilty, based on the data, evidence.
For good or for bad, the binary classification problem in the field of
criminal justice is typically not solved using statistical methods per se, but
using different methods such as witness testimony.
But one can argue that indirectly,
historical data plays an important role here.
A person possessing a weapon of murder is far more likely to be a perpetrator
than the one without a weapon in similar circumstances.
At the same time, of course,
other factors play an important role, such as witness testimony or simply prejudice.
Think about the binary classification outcome of Salem witch trials.
>> Even animals routinely solve binary classification problems
when they face a potential threat.
Upon seeing a creature, they need to make an instant termination of the kind,
predator versus not a predator, and react rapidly and accordingly.
The faster and more accurately this classification problem is solved
the better the chances of survival are for the animal.
In nature this classification problem is solved by the brain processing the given
data associated with potential threat.
Including the visual image, smell, speed of movement, etc.
One artificial model based on how animals solve such a binary classification problem
is called the neural network.
It's intended to loosely model brain activity and
it will be discussed later in this module.