The classification problems we will discuss in this module
will be the kind sold by in statistical methods based on your medical data.
This applies to most, but not all of the examples above.
For example, the criminal justice system example relies more on witness testimony
rather than hard data and such examples will not be considered in this module.
Depending on the context, one might deal with situations
where the data is in abundance, or conversely, is very scarce.
For example, in trying to design a classifier for
spam, lots of data is typically available
in the form of prior emails already categorized as spam versus not spam.
Conversely, in clinical trials the data comes from experiments conducted on human
volunteers.
Such things are very expensive both financially and otherwise.
As a result, are based on much smaller amounts of experimental data.
>> But even in the case where the data in abundant,
one may face a huge imbalance of the data availability in the different categories.
For example,
typically only a very small proportion of credit card transactions are fraud.
Thus, while the amount of data is huge,
those that fall into the fraud category constitute a much smaller amount.
Similarly only a tinny number of say images taken from a street camera
correspond to wanted people such a criminals, terrorists or lost children.
Furthermore, in trying to correctly classify the type of object
the implications of misclassification actually may have very different
consequences with different levels of severity.
This brings us to the subject of type one versus type two errors.
When solving a binary classification problem, we encounter two types of errors.
Consider again a medical fraud example.
The two categories associated with this example are legitimate and fraud.
The two types of errors we're about to discuss relate the ultimate classification
decision made by a classifier to the crack but unknown to the classifier category.
Suppose for example an insurance company receives a claim
which happens to be a legitimate one.
Though of course company has no way of knowing that for sure.
Suppose further that an automated system designed to make a preliminary
determination declares the claim to be a fraud clearly making a mistake,
somewhat arbitrary and somewhat noncreatively.
We call this type 1 error to contrast it with the following mistake naturally
called type 2 error.
A claim which happens to be a fraud though unknown to the classifier is received but
the classifier determines it to be a legitimate one.
>> Consider our example of a patient with severe symptoms who
is rushed to an emergency center.
Suppose this patient is not having a heart attack, even though he has severe symptoms
that make the heart attack hypothesis very plausible to doctors.
Again, this is clearly not something the doctors know a priori.
Suppose they make an incorrect inference and decide that the patient is having
the heart attack, and they conduct the treatment appropriate for a heart attack.
This is a type 1 classification error.
Conversely if a patient is indeed suffering a heart attack but
the medical team fails to see this we're dealing with a type 2 error.
>> Deciding which type of the classification is
type 1 versus type 2 is clearly somewhat arbitrary.
And depends on the category which is declared to be the first category and
which one is the second one.
This is really up to the classifier, and
simply is a matter of labeling the classes.
Typically, in statistics the classes are called null hypothesis and
alternative hypothesis, and we will talk about this in our future lectures.
What is important to keep in mind though,
is the potential difference in severity of making type one versus type two error.
>> For example, in the case of medical fraud discussed earlier,
a type one error leads to an inconvenience for
the medical provider who needs to waste time proving the validity of his claim.
If this happens to often the provider may stop excepting this type of insurance
which could cost the insurance company to loose customers.
On the other hand, a type 2 error, where the insurance company pays for
a fraudulent claim, leads to a financial loss coming from paying for a false claim.
It may also lead medical providers to believe they can get away with fraud and
embolden them to commit further fraud in the future.
It's a judgment call as to what type of error is more severe, and thus,
which one needs to be mitigated more stringently.
But clearly a balance needs to be struck.
Contrast this with the implications of the two types of errors in the heart
attack example.
Type 1 error leads to a healthy patient or a patient suffering from something much
less severe then a heart attack, receiving the treatment for a heart attack.
Conversely, type two error results in a patient suffering from a heart attack
Not receiving the right treatments.
The potential implications of a type 2 error are very severe,
possibly leading to death.
Whereas the implication of a type 1 error, while possibly very unpleasant,
are usually not life-threatening.
>> The potential difference of severity of two types of error is important to keep in
mind since, as we will see later,
there is a fundamental trade off between the likelihood of two types of errors.
With a fixed amount of data, one can typically make type one
errors small only at the expense of increasing type two error and vice versa.
Balancing the two types of errors should depend ultimately
on the severity of the implications of these errors.
Think about the implications of type one and type two errors for
our other examples.
Guilty versus not guilty.
Predator versus not a predator.
>> A parting thought we would like to discuss in this introductory lecture
is the importance of a solid scientific approach in applying
a variety of classification methods,
such as the ones that we are going to be discussing in future lectures.
While these methods are based on rigorous statistical foundations, it's easy to
misuse them and to obtain wrong conclusions by misapplying them as such.
Such misuse is particularly likely in instances where the party conducting
the classification analysis has a stake in a particular outcome.
For example, a pharmaceutical company testing the effectiveness of a particular
drug or scientists testing a particular scientific hypothesis typically wish for
one of the two particular outcomes.
Understanding how to recognize and avoid such bias is a crucial yet
surprisingly subtle question.
At the end of this module we'll discuss some frequently occurring examples
of the misuse of classification methods.
And we'll discuss ways to prevent them.