In the discussion of hypothesis testing, we have considered only
one example involving normally distributed random variables.
But the hypothesis testing method is much broader than that, and
allows you to test the validity of the probability distribution itself.
Let us illustrate this in a special case when the underlying distribution is
binomial.
In the beginning of the lecture, we mentioned an example of using hypothesis
testing for the analysis of police racial profiling and
possibly testing the hypothesis that the police is particularly
biased against people of color when they pull over drivers on the road.
Let us say that in the year of 2015 among the drivers stopped by
the police 35% were black drivers.
The actual figures are somewhat different and
you can find some of these figures on the Bureau of Justice Statistics website.
One way to think about the statistics is that if one draws a random driver from
the list of all drivers stopped by the police in the year of 2015,
there’s a 35% chance that this driver is African American.
Since this percentage is higher than the percentage of black drivers among
all the roughly 200 million drivers in the US, this already suggests a bias.
But let us imagine the following situation.
Community organizers in several towns across several states,
claim that in fact the situation is worse in their communities than it is in the US
on average, however disturbing these averages are on their own.
They claim that even if one accepts for the sake of argument
that racial profiling is non-existing from a statistical point of view, in the US on
average the police precincts in their towns do rely on racial profiling.
To support their claim, the data was provided for two precincts,
which we just call Precinct A and Precinct B for simplicity.
The data shows that during the year of 2015, out of approximately
12,567 drivers stopped by the police, in fact 4,513 were black.
4,513 divided by 12,567 is approximately 0.359,
which is larger than 35% and hence the claim of racial profiling.
For the second Precinct B among 15,687 drivers stopped 5,562 were black.
Again, 5,562 divided by 15,687 is approximately 0.354,
which is also larger than 35% and the claim of racial profiling is made again.
How can we asses the statistical validity of these claims?
We do this by conducting the hypotheses test.
We take as our null hypothesis, namely the hypothesis to be tested, that
the drivers pulled over by police in these precincts are as likely to be black as for
the statistics across US suggest.
Namely, a driver pulled over by police in these precincts is black
with 35% likelihood, as is the national figure.
We set Type 1 error threshold alpha to be 5%,
this is up to the person conducting the test, of course and
different error rates may be considered, but let us accept if for now.
Assuming the validity of this hypothesis, we will compute the likelihood
that among 12,567 drivers in Precinct A at least 4,513 were black.
Namely at least as many as was the number of black drivers actually pulled over.
If this probability is greater than 5%,
we accept the hypothesis as valid with 5% error rate and say that the exceedance of
35% rate in this precinct is just a statistical fluctuation.
If it is less than 5%, we will reject this hypothesis and
say that the number of black drivers actually pulled over was unusually high.
We will conduct a similar analysis for Precinct B.
How can we compute these probabilities?
If the 35% hypothesis is true, then according to the binomial distribution,
the likelihood that out of 12,567 drivers at least 4,513 were black can
be computed using the following formula for binomial distribution as follows.
Take some time to convince yourself that we have applied the formula for
the binomial distribution correctly.
This might look horrendous but in fact most statistical softwares and
many other non-statistical packages such as MathLab will find and
compute this expression in a split sec.
The answer in this case is 0.016 or about 1.6%.
We conclude that under the null hypothesis, no profiling.
The likelihood that out of 12,567 stopped
drivers 4,513 were black is approximately only 1.6%.
Since this is below 5% selected for Type 1 error tolerance,
we must reject the hypothesis.
Thus, according to the data, it is unlikely, only 1.6% chance,
that the black drivers were stopped at the same rate as in the US on average.
This of course does not legally prove the presence of racial profiling,
just indicates the statistical evidence for it.
What about Precinct B?
Using a similar analysis the likelihood that out of 15,687 stopped
drivers at least 5,562 are black is given by the following expression,
which is evaluated to be approximately 11.4%.
Since 11.4% is higher than 5%, we must accept the null hypothesis.
Namely, according to the statistical analysis,
there is no evidence of racial profiling in Precinct B.
Of course again, this is just a statistical analysis.
In the reality, such an analysis might suggest a further investigation
where profiling appears to take place according to the statistical evidence.
As far as the analysis can either confirm the presence of profiling or
not find any evidence of it.
The statistical tools can simply assist in the identifying, relatively quickly,
precincts where there is some statistical evidence of profiling.
From the methodological perspective, we just gave an example of testing your
hypothesis regarding the validity of a certain distributional assumption,
binomial distribution being the case.
One can naturally apply it to other types of distributions, such as uniform,
geometric, Poisson distribution and many others.
The method is very general.
It is also very useful, I hope I have convinced you of that.