
On January 28, 1986, NASA's space shuttle Challenger
was scheduled to be launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida.
The event was highly publicized, and President Reagan
was expected to make an announcement about the launch
on news channels.
The temperature was near freezing
on this day, which was unusual for this geographic location.
Several engineers expressed concerns
about the safety of the launch.
Specifically, they were concerned about the reliability
of so-called o-rings at low temperatures,
rising the possibility of failure,
which could lead to a catastrophe.
However, there were five such rings.
And all five of them would need to fail for the destruction
of the Challenger.
The managers at NASA, who were strongly
against the postponement of the launch,
noted that among the o-rings failures observed,
a few happened at high temperature,
thereby conjecturing that the threat for low temperature
was not worthy of postponement.
After intense discussion, they prevailed,
and NASA went ahead with the launch.
Tragically, soon after the launch,
the Challenger disintegrated and came apart,
killing everybody on board.
The post-mortem analysis revealed
that a failure of all five rings of the shuttle
were the cause of the disaster.
Was the disaster avoidable?
Was there enough evidence for the engineers
to convince managers at NASA that the performance of o-rings
at low temperature was a serious vulnerability?
In this lecture, we discuss the methods
of estimating the likelihood, namely
the probability of a particular event, given the data at hand.
The method has many, many applications across fields.
And to illustrate the idea, let us go back
to some of the examples we have introduced
in our first lecture.
For the credit card example, we might
want to estimate the probability that the particular transaction
is a fraud, given some information
about this transaction-- for example,
the distance between the place where the sale took place
and the residence of the credit card owner; or for example,
the likelihood that the claim submitted to the insurance
company is a fraud, given the number of particular procedures
conducted by the medical provider;
or the likelihood that the patient will develop
a serious heart condition given his weight and average blood
pressure; or finally, going back to the beginning of this class,
the likelihood that all five o-rings fail,
given the current temperature.
This last example will be the subject of a special case
discussion to be done after we introduce
the basics in this lecture.
The method of logistic regression
allows us to answer these types of questions
by building the model of the following form.
Let us discuss the details of this model.
Here, the symbol e stands for the hopefully familiar Euler's
Constant, which roughly equals x corresponds
to an independent or explanatory variable, such as for example
the distance between the sale and home
location for the credit card example,
or the weight of the patient for our second example.
Letter e corresponds to the event of the interest,
such as transaction is a fraud, or that a given
patient develops diabetes.
The expression, which we read as the probability of the event
e condition on the value x, is the quantity of interest.
This is what we want to estimate.
Finally, the coefficients beta 0 and beta
are called the regression coefficients, and are
to be estimated from the data.
For now, don't worry about how this estimation is done.
We will explain it later.
Consider our diabetes example.
Suppose based on the past medical data,
the coefficients beta 0 and beta are estimated to be as follows.
Then according to this model, a patient with a body weight
of say 135 pounds--
which is, by the way, my weight--
has a chance of developing diabetes
equal to namely approximately 13%.
Incidentally, approximately 9% of the US population
are suffering from some form of diabetes.
So actually this number is not too unreasonable.
On the other hand, for a significantly obese patient
with weight, say, 275 pounds, the corresponding likelihood
is estimated to be as follows--
namely approximately 23%.
According to this model, obesity is a significant risk factor
for diabetes.
One has to be extremely careful in interpreting this model.
A more accurate way to express this conclusion of the model
would be to say that within a group of people with otherwise
similar characteristics, a patient with body weight 275
pounds has roughly 23% chances of having diabetes.
This is very similar to the care needed
in discussion of conclusions of the usual linear regression
model.
In fact, as you probably see, the logistic regression
has also strong similarity with linear regression model.
Revealing a linear regression model
is probably a good idea before continuing.
But strictly speaking, it is not necessary at this point.
Let us go back to the expression here.
Since the numerator is smaller than the denominator,
the ratio takes [? squarely ?] between 0 and 1.
And therefore, it is a suitable expression
for a probability value.
The function of the form that you see here
is called logistic function.
And this is where the logistic regression derives its name.
In this example, we have used only one independent variable--
body weight--
in to estimate the probability of developing diabetes.
Naturally, some other factors might play a role here.
For example, genetics.
Consider, for example, the following logistic regression
model.
In this example, we have two independent variables-- x,
which is before stands for the body weight,
and y, which counts the number of parents with diabetes,
and which takes value of either 0 or 1 or 2.
The coefficients beta w is what we
denoted by simply beta in the previous example.
Though its actual value might be different.
And the coefficient beta g is a new coefficient corresponding
to the newly introduced explanatory variable y,
corresponding to the genetic predisposition for diabetes.
Let us assume that using past data,
the coefficients are estimated to be as follows.
Then a patient with a weight of 215 pounds
and none of the parents suffering from diabetes
has likelihood of developing diabetes equal to roughly 18%.
At the same time, a patient with the same weight of 215 pounds
who has both parents suffering from diabetes,
according to this model, has likelihood of roughly 25%
for developing diabetes over the lifetime.
We see that according to this model,
the genetics plays a significant role in the likelihood
of developing this sickness.
Of course, this is only likelihood.
While we cannot change our genetics-- well, not yet--
we can certainly impact other important risk factors such
as weight, diet, lifestyles, to name a few,
which are known to play a role in the likelihood of developing
a sickness.
Again, if one has access to further data,
just as in the case of linear regression,
additional independent variables can
be used for likelihood estimation
with better accuracy.