
Hi.
I'm Kalyan Veeramachaneni.
In this module, we will cover how
one goes about building predictive models
from temporal data.
Models like this are all around us.
And we are feeding data to them every day whether we know it
or not.
For example, imagine that an online retailer
is trying to predict what product a particular customer
is most likely to buy.
They will build a predictive model
to figure this out using the data from the interactions
the customer has had in the past.
Another example might be an online education platform
very similar to this one.
A number of students signed up for the course.
But as the course progresses, some of them drop out.
The instructor wants to do something about this.
He or she may want to predict beforehand who's
likely to leave the course.
Then they can intervene and motivate the students
at the risk of dropping out.
These two examples and others that fit in this category
have three things in common.
First, we are trying to predict whether an outcome of interest,
like a purchase or dropout, is going to happen in the future.
Second, there is a set of detailed observations available
that have been collected over time
that can be used to learn a model and make a prediction.
Finally, once the prediction has been made,
it will be used to take some kind of action,
like offering a deal to a customer
or helping a student who is maybe considering dropping out.
Throughout this module, we will use retail-based scenarios
to describe each step of the process of deriving
predictive models from data.
We'll also go through two case studies,
stepping through software that is
used to develop these models.
Let's first imagine an online retailer who
wants to predict which department
a particular customer is likely to buy from--
for example, clothing home goods, groceries, skin care,
or electronics.
If the retailer is able to predict this,
he can use this information to personalize
the browser for the customer and highlight
the products from those departments
or even offer a special deal.
So let's go step by step and go through the process
of building a predictive model to answer this question.
The first step is seeing what kind of data
is available to work with.
The data collected here is a set of transactions
that the customer has already had with the retail website.
It comes as timestamped recordings
for each transaction.
For example, one recording may look
like timestamp, customer ID, URL ID, product ID, and event type.
Each recording, in addition to noting time it occurred
and the customer who it belongs to, captures the URL at which
the customer was, the product he was browsing,
and the event type captures the type of action
the customer took.
The event type could be one of these five--
browse, save for the future, add to the cart,
check out, and check details.
A large online retailer might produce
millions of these interaction recordings on a single day.
The second step in predictive modeling
is to get very concrete and specific about defining
the outcome we want to predict.
In this case, we would like to answer the specific question,
which department is the customer likely to buy from next?
So let's say there are five departments in total--
clothing, skincare, groceries, electronics, and goods.
In other words, at any point of time t,
we would like to predict which of these five departments
a customer is most likely to buy from next.
To train a model to predict this,
we look at the data we have and extract
what we call training examples.
Simply put, a training example is made up
of one past occurrence of the outcome we want to predict
as well as some amount of data that was generated
before that occurrence.
We can use training examples to train a model.
So in this case, let's say a customer
brought a product from the clothing department
on August 1, 2017.
One trainee example would be made up
of that purchase as well as all the interactions
the customer had with the online retailer over a certain amount
of time prior to August 1.
Our next step involves searching through past data
and aggregating a whole list of training examples
across all customers.
We call this process prediction engineering.
Once we have training examples, our next step
is to identify aspects of customer's past interactions
that indicate he's about to buy from the clothing department.
For example, some of these might be how many times
did the customer click on items in the clothing department
before making that purchase versus other departments?
How much time did the customer spend browsing the clothing
department?
Each of these telltale aspects is
computed from the data and forms a variable
that we can then use in modeling.
These variables are called features.
And the process of thinking them up and writing the software
to extract them is called feature engineering.
Feature engineering gives us a matrix
where each variable makes up a column.
And each row is a training example.
We will cover feature engineering
in much more detail in a subsequent video.
Once we have a matrix of features and the outcome
we want to predict, we are ready to build a model.
Models usually take the form f of x
is equal to y where x is the variables and y is the outcome
and f is a function that can be applied to x to predict y.
In previous modules, you have learned
how to build and assess models when a matrix of this kind
is given to you.
To recap from those, if the outcome variable is continuous,
it is a regression problem.
And if the outcome variable is discrete or categorical,
it's a classification problem.
Building regression models was covered in module 2.
And classification models were described similarly
in module 3.
We will cover this further in a subsequent video.
And we will also explain how to evaluate
predictive models that have been developed over temporal data.
Finally, with the predictive model in hand,
the retailer is ready to use it to make a prediction.