In this segment,
we consider the case study of the gender wage gap in the United States.
Here we ask and answer the following question.
What is the difference in predicted wages between men and
women with the same job-relevant characteristics?
We work with the U.S. current population survey data for the year 2012.
We first take a look at the following descriptive statistics for
the subsamples of single men and single women
with education attainment equal to high school, some college, or college.
The min hourly wage is $16 for men, and about $15 for women.
So the difference is $1, without controlling for
job relevant characteristics.
If we take a look at some of these characteristics, we see that on average,
men have more experience, but women are more likely to have college degrees, or
some college education.
We also see the geographical distribution for men and women is similar.
We next proceed to answer our question.
We estimate the linear regression model that we have introduced.
Our outcome Y is hourly wage, and
our target regressor D is the indicator of being a female.
And our control's W's are the job-relevant characteristics.
We consider two specifications for the controls.
In the basic model, our W's consist of education and
regional indicators, experience, experience squared, and experience cubed.
In the flexible model, our W's consist of controls in the basic models and
all of their two-way interactions.
We now go to the empirical results.
In the following table,
we see the estimated regression coefficient, its standard error and
the 95% confidence interval for both basic and flexible regression models.
The results for the two regression models is very close degree.
The estimated gender gap in hourly wage is about -$2.
This means that women get paid $2 less per hour on average than men, controlling for
experience, education, and geographical region.
The 95% confidence interval arranges for -2.7 to minus $1.
We conclude that he difference in the hourly wage for men and
women who have the same recorded characteristics is both statistically and
economically significant.
To sum it up, we applied the ideas we discussed so
far to learn about the gender wage gap.
The gender wage gap may partly reflect gender discrimination
against women in the labor market.
It may also partly reflect the so called selection effect,
namely that women are more likely to end up in occupations that pay somewhat less.
For example, in teaching.
This segment concludes our discussion of the classical linear regression.
Next, we will briefly discuss other types of regression.